Sixth  
Edition
Rockin’ o ut
Popular Music  
in the U.S.A.
Reebee Garofalo
University of Massachusetts Boston
Steve Waksman
Smith College
Boston  Columbus  Indianapolis  New York  San Francisco  Upper Saddle River
Amsterdam
 
Cape Town
 
Dubai
 
London
 
Madrid
 
Milan
 
Munich
 
Paris
 
Montréal
 
Toronto
Delhi
 
Mexico City
 
São Paulo
 
Sydney
 
Hong Kong
 
Seoul
 
Singapore
 
Taipei
 
TokyoEditor in Chief: Ashley Dodge
Editorial Assistant: Nicole SuddethEditorial Project Manager: Reena DalalDirector of Marketing: Brandy DawsonExecutive Marketing Manager: Kelly MayMarketing Coordinator: Jessica WarrenManaging Editor: Denise ForlowProject Manager: Kathy SleysSenior Operations Supervisor: Mary FischerOperations Specialist: Eileen CoralloArt Director: Jayne ConteCover Designer: Bruce KenselaarCover Image: Left image- © PAUSAL/Alamy 
 
Right image - © Pictorial Press Ltd/Alamy  
 
Left - © PAUSAL/Alamy
Director of Digital Media: Brian HylandDigital Media Project Manager: Tina GagliostroFull-Service Project Management and composition:  
 
Sudip Sinha/PreMedia Global, Inc.
Printer/Binder/Cover Printer: Edwards Brothers/ 
 
Malloy
Text Font: Bell MT Std 10/14 
Photo credits:
Alamy: pages 19, 25, 27, 36, 46, 49, 51, 52, 66, 69, 79,  
90, 96, 113, 114, 116, 130, 136, 146, 151, 156, 168, 174, 188, 190, 205, 216, 220, 226, 230, 261, 262, 273, 277, 280, 290, 307, 311, 315, 320, 326, 362, 371, 380, 382,  388, 413, 434, 447, 453, and 456. Odile Noel/Alamy: page 102.Marka/Alamy: pages 163, 173, and 207.Don Leavitt/Alamy: page 215.a berti/Alamy: page 291.Kpa Tg/Alamy: page 297.Ray Tamarra/Alamy: page 334.Tony Bartolo/Alamy: page 366.Trinity Mirror/Alamy: page 404.Gregorio Binuya/Alamy: page 405.Kevin Sullivan/Alamy: page 407.Peter Brooker/Alamy: page 410.Jared Milgrim/Alamy: page 441.Ryan  Rodrick Beile/Alamy: page 443.
 
Steve Double/Alamy: page 459.
 
Getty Images, Inc.: pages 30, 109, 131, 152, 160, 203, 
233, 235, 245, 254, 255, 258, 269, 274, 302, 327, 330, 337, 340, 344, and 351.Gilles Petard/Getty Images, Inc.: page 85James Kriegsmann/Getty Images, Inc.: page 105Gilles Petard/Getty Images, Inc.: 135Tom Copi/Getty Images, Inc.: pages: 182 and 195Richard Creamer/Getty Images, Inc.: page 241Raymond Boyd/Getty Images, Inc.: page 356Sue Schneider/Getty Images, Inc.: pages 367, 385,  and 391Al Pereira/Getty Images, Inc.: pages 394 and 403Tabatha Fireman/Getty Images, Inc.: pages 411 and 436David Corio/Getty Images, Inc.: 440Newscom: pages 72 and 419Chine Nouvelle/Newscom: page 332Edward Colver/Associated Press: page 270Reebee Garofalo: page 425Scott Goodwin Photography: page 430
Copyright © 2014, 2011, 2008 by Reebee Garofalo, Somerville , Massachussetts 02143 Copyright © 2005, 2000, 1997 by Pearson Education, Inc.All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. This publication is protected by Copyright and permis-sion should be obtained from the publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or likewise. To obtain permission(s) to use material from this work, please submit a written request to Pearson Education, Inc., Permissions Department, One Lake Street, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458 or you may fax your request to 201-236-3290.
Many of the designations by manufacturers and seller to distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where 
those designations appear in this book, and the publisher was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in initial caps or all caps.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataGarofalo, Reebee.
 
Rockin’ out : popular music in the U.S.A. / Reebee Garofalo, Steve Waksman. — Sixth edition.
  
pages cm
 
ISBN-13: 978-0-205-95680-7
 
ISBN-10: 0-205-95680-7
 
1.
 
Popular music—United States—History and criticism.
 
I.
 
Waksman, Steve.
 
II.
 
Title.
 
III.
 
Title: Rocking out.
 
ML3477.G37 2013
 
781.640973—dc23
 
2013013403
10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1
 
ISBN 10: 0-205- 95680-7
 
ISBN 13: 978-0-205- 95680-7Contents
Preface   x
    introduction: definitions, themes, and issues   1
Into the Twentieth Century: Popular Music and Mass Culture   2
Rock ‘n’ Roll: The Birth of a New Era   4
Marketing and the Politics of Race, Language, and Gender   8
No Hablamos Español: The Language Barrier   11
The Long, Hard Climb: Gender Discrimination   13
Regulating Popular Music   14
 1 Constructing tin Pan Alley:  
From Minstrelsy to Mass Culture   16
Minstrelsy: The Making of Mainstream U.S. Culture   17
Sheet Music, Sound Recording, and the Sounds of Music   20
Tin Pan Alley Creates Musical Tradition   24
Incorporating Ragtime, Blues, and Jazz   25
Listening Guide 1: “ Alexander’s Ragtime Band”   26
Dance Crazes, Latin Influences, Musical Theater, and Records   29
Commercial Broadcasting: A Very Private Enterprise   31
The Growth of Network Radio   32
The Advertisers versus the Programmers   33
Tin Pan Alley Goes Hollywood…and Latin   35
 2 Blues, Jazz, and Country:  
the Segregation of Popular Music   39
Blues, Jazz, and Country: More Equal Than Separate   40
Race Music: The Popular Sounds of Black America   43
The Birth of the Blues   43
Listening Guide 2: “Crazy Blues”   45
All That Jazz   47
  iiiiv ROCKIN ’ OUTHillbilly: The Music of the White Working Class   50
Listening Guide 3: “Blue Yodel #9 (Standin’ on the Corner)”   53
Disseminating Blues, Jazz, and Country: More Separate Than Equal   54
The Long Road Back for Records   56
 3 “Good Rockin’ tonight”:  
the Rise of Rhythm and Blues   59
The Publishers and the Broadcasters: ASCAP versus BMI   60
Enter the Deejay: The Broadcasters versus the AFM   61
From Big Bands to Solo Singers   63
The Major Labels Reclaim Country Music   65
Listening Guide 4: “Hey, Good Lookin’”   67
The Independents Promote Rhythm and Blues   68
Listening Guide 5: “(Mama) He Treats Your Daughter Mean”   73
Mass Technology and Popular Taste   75
High Fidelity/Low Overhead   75
Television and the Suppression of FM Broadcasting   76
Independent Radio: Deejays in Your Face   77
 4 Crossing Cultures:  
the Eruption of Rock ‘n’ Roll   81
Cultural Diversity: The Roots of Rock ‘n’ Roll   82
Structural Changes in the Music Industry   84
Sounds of the Cities   87
New Orleans: The Fertile Crescent of Rock ‘n’ Roll   87
Listening Guide 6: “Tutti Frutti”   91
Los Angeles: From Jump Blues to Chicano Rock   93
Chicago: The Blues Electrified   95
Listening Guide 7: “Rock and Roll Music”   97
Cincinnati: The Crossroads of Blues and Country   100
R&B Sanctified: The Gospel Connection   101
Doo Wop: The Intersection of Gospel, Jazz, and Pop   104
Listening Guide 8: “Sh’Boom”   107
Latin Music Rocks   111
Rockabilly: The Country Strain   113
Listening Guide 9: “Hound Dog”   119 CONTENTS  v 5 the Empire Strikes Back:  
the Reaction to Rock ‘n’ Roll   124
The Established Powers Fight Back   126
Covering the Bases   127
Listening Guide 10: “Tutti Frutti”   129
Pop Diversions: From Kingston Town to the Kingston Trio   130
“Schlock Rock”: Enter the White Middle Class   132
Television’s Greatest Hits   135
The Brill Building: The New Tin Pan Alley   137
The War on Rock ‘n’ Roll   138
Surf ’s Up!   142
Listening Guide 11: “Surfin’ U.S.A.”   145
 6 Popular Music and Political Culture:  
the Sixties   149
The Civil Rights Movement and Popular Music   150
Girl Groups, Male Producers, and Brill Building Pop   151
Selected Brill Building Girl Group Classics   154
Motown: The Integration of Pop   155
Folk Music: The Voice of Civil Rights   157
Listening Guide 12: “Stop! In the Name of Love”   158
Listening Guide 13: “The Times They Are A-Changin’”   161
The British Invasion Occupies the Pop Charts   163
Breaking the Sounds of Silence: New Voices in the Music   169
Folk Rock: Adding Substance to Form   169
Black (Music) Is Beautiful   171
Latino Rock ‘n’ Roll: From the Southwest to the Spanish Caribbean   175
Listening Guide 14: “(I Got You) I Feel Good”   176
Listening Guide 15: “Oye Como Va”   179
Rock and Revolution: The Counterculture   181
Blues on Acid: Psychedelic Rock   182
Commercializing the Counterculture: Sgt. Pepper and Monterey Pop   184
Listening Guide 16: “ A Day in the Life”   186
Riding the Storm: Radicals, Riots, and Revolutions   190
Woodstock and Altamont: The Highs and the Lows   193vi ROCKIN ’ OUT 7 Music Versus Markets:  
the Fragmentation of Pop   197
The Music Industry: A Sound Investment   198
Merger Mania   198
Expanding the Infrastructure: Counterculture as Commodity   200
Creativity and Commerce: Rock as Art   203
Listening Guide 17: “Roundabout”   208
Sweeter Soul Music   211
Listening Guide 18: “You Make Me Feel Brand New”   214
Singer/Songwriters, Soft Rock, and More   218
Listening Guide 19: “You’ve Got a Friend”   221
Women’s Music: The Feminist Alternative   225
From Country Rock to Southern Boogie   228
Mad with Power: Heavy Metal   234
Listening Guide 20: “Smoke on the Water”   238
All That Glitters Does Not Sell Gold   242
Listening Guide 21: “Changes”   244
 8 Punk and disco:  
the Poles of Pop   247
Punk Versus Disco   249
Punk: Rock as (White) Noise   250
Born in the U.S.A.   251
Listening Guide 22: “I Don’t Wanna Be Learned, I Don’t Wanna  
 Be Tamed”   256
Anarchy in the U.K.   259
Listening Guide 23: “ Anarchy in the U.K.”   260
Flirtation with Fascism: The Underbelly of Punk   263
Rock Against Racism: Progressive Punk   265
Riding the New Wave   267
Disco: The Rhythm without the Blues   271
Proto-Disco: The Funk Connection   272
Up from the Disco Underground   275
Listening Guide 24: “Last Dance”   278
Mainstream Disco: The Bee Gees Boogie Down   279
The Hard Rock Reaction   282 CONTENTS  vii 9 Are We the World? Music Videos,  
Superstars, and Mega-Events   285
Early Music Television: They Want Their MTV   287
Listening Guide 25: “Beat It”   293
Superstars: The Road to Economic Recovery   295
Listening Guide 26: “Born in the U.S.A.”   298
Listening Guide 27: “Like a Virgin”   301
Charity Rock and Mega-Events: Who Is the World?   306
Christmas in Ethiopia: The Advent of Charity Rock   307
Mega-Events: The Politics of Mass Culture   309
 10 Rap and Metal:  
the Voices of Youth Culture   317
The Continuing History of Heavy Metal   318
Heavy Metal: The New Wave   319
Listening Guide 28: “Jump”   322
Metal Fragments   325
Listening Guide 29: “…And Justice for All”   328
Hip Hop, Don’t Stop   333
Old School Rap   333
Hip Hop: The Next Generation   336
Listening Guide 30: “Rock Box”   338
Listening Guide 31: “Ladies First”   343
Regulating Popular Music: The Politics of Censorship   346
The Parents Music Resource Center   347
The Issues: Sex, Drugs, and Rock ’n’ Roll Revisited   349
 11 Repackaging Pop:  the Changing Mainstream   359
Meet the New Boss…Bigger than the Old Boss   361
Major Labels and Monster Contracts   362
Teen Pop: Boy Bands and Teen Queens   364
Listening Guide 32: “…Baby One More Time”   368viii  ROCKIN ’ OUTSoundScan: Remapping the Charts   370
From Indie Scenes to Alternative Nation   370
Seattle: From Sub Pop to Superstars   373
Listening Guide 33: “Smells Like Teen Spirit”   374
Lollapalooza and Pop Punk: Mainstreaming the Counterculture   377
Country into Pop   381
The Latin Boom and Beyond   383
Listening Guide 34: “Livin’ La Vida Loca”   385
Black Music at the Base   390
Hip Hop with Soul: The New R&B   390
Branding Rap: Moguls from the Street   393
Listening Guide 35: “I’ll Be Missing You”   395
Diversifying Hip Hop   402
Women on the Rise   407
Listening Guide 36: “Bad Romance”   413
 12 Changing Channels: Music and Media  
in the new Millennium   417
They Want Their MP3   418
Legislation and Litigation   420
Piracy and Theft   422
The Music Industry in a Post-Napster World   423
Popular Music, Power, and Protest after 9/11   429
Corporate Radio and the New Patriotism   431
Country Music Goes to War   433
Listening Guide 37: “Courtesy of the Red, White, and Blue  
 (The Angry American)”   435
Dissent Unplugged   437
Mixing Sound, Mashing Beats   442
Copyright Criminals   444
The DJ as Star   446
Listening Guide 38: “Turn Me On”   448
Multimedia Stardom   451
Idol Worship   452
Learning from YouTube   454
The Future of Music   456 CONTENTS  ixLive Music in the Digital Era   457
Making Music Free   458
Listening Guide 39: “Everything in Its Right Place”   460
Streaming the Long Tail   462
notes  465
Bibliography   491
Subject index  506
Music index  528Preface
The most significant thing about the sixth edition of Rockin’ Out: Popular Music in the U.S.A. is 
that I have brought on a co-author—Steve Waksman. Yes, that Steve Waksman; the one who wrote Instruments of Desire: The Electric Guitar and the Shaping of Musical Experience, and the 
award-winning This Ain’t the Summer of Love: Conflict and Crossover in Heavy Metal and Punk. 
Steve is an Associate Professor of Music and American Studies at Smith College, an outstanding 
and well-respected scholar, and a lifelong fan and player of popular music. It is extremely grati-fying for me to have someone of Steve’s caliber on board because he brings fresh eyes and ears to a history that continues to be discovered and reinterpreted. The book has been revised and updated throughout—reflecting the addition of Steve’s formidable knowledge and communica-tion skills—to create a richer, deeper, and more nuanced history that remains as accessible as it is informative. Once you start reading the new edition, I think you will agree.
As I have said in previous editions of Rockin’ Out, popular music—playing it, listening to 
it, learning from it, teaching others what I know—has been one of the organizing principles of 
my life ever since I can remember. It still energizes me, provides the sound track for significant moments in my life, and helps me to navigate the world around me. In the society at large, discus-sions of its significance can be found everywhere, from family dinners and Saturday night parties to corporate boardrooms and congressional chambers. There has also been an increasing interest in popular music courses on college and university campuses. The fact that popular music has been a source of pleasure for millions of people all over the world is reason enough for listening to it. But popular music is also a social and political indicator that mirrors and influences the soci-ety in which we live. This is the reason for studying it. Rockin’ Out offers one good way to do that.
Successive editions of Rockin’ Out have not only updated popular music history with new 
research into current trends, but they have also added features designed to make the text more 
user-friendly. The second edition of the book, for example, saw the addition of a song index, 
which made Rockin’ Out more useful as a source book. That edition also included the conver-sion of a number of artist and song lists from the text into easy-to-understand tables that gave the reader a graphic sense of historical patterns and preserved the narrative for more important analytic points. The third edition included an accompanying compilation CD of songs selected to enhance the historical narrative. In the fourth edition, the CD was replaced by two iTunes playlists, constructed by Richard Kassel, that made nearly 200 songs from the book readily available for convenient download. The fourth edition also added a number of carefully selected listening guides to deepen the analysis of musical elements and further enhance the narrative.  
Angela Mariani-Smith deserves major credit, along with Chris Smith, for contributing the listen-ing guides. The fifth edition was accompanied by a much more feature-rich website that 
 
include 
additional music tables and listening guides with direct links to musical selections, chapter out-lines, and discussion questions, as well as pointers to regularly updated supplementary 
 
resources 
and other interactive features. And, now, for the sixth edition, co-author Steve 
 
Waksman adds a 
new and complementary voice that enhances the historical narrative significantly.
x  P REFACE  xiNaturally, a book of the scope of Rockin’ Out does not fall from the sky. Although the 
names of the two authors grace the cover, Rockin’ Out is a work that involves countless oth-
ers. In addition to drawing on original research and a wealth of primary and secondary source 
material, Rockin’ Out has been shaped by discussions over the years with Bill Adler, William 
Barlow, Marcus Breen, Iain Chambers, Jannette Dates, Kai Fikentscher, Murray Forman, Simon 
Frith, Donna Gaines, Andrew Goodwin, Herman Gray, Larry Grossberg, Charles Hamm, Dave Harker, Simon Jones, Steve Jones, Anahid Kassabian, Charlie Keil, George Lipsitz, Dick 
 
Lourie, 
Portia Maultsby, Susan McClary, Keith Negus, Deborah Pacini Hernandez, Richard Peterson, Tricia Rose, Danny Schechter, Larry Shore, Philip Tagg, Robert Walser, Peter Wicke, and many others too numerous to mention.
The late Dave Sanjek demonstrated over and over that he was one of the most knowl-
edgeable and forthcoming researchers in the field. Having moved in his final years from his 
long-standing position of archivist at BMI to a well-deserved professorship of music at Salford University, Dave was often my first call for anything in the book that needed discussion. The late Rick Dutka still occupies a special place in my heart and mind as someone whose knowledge of and love for popular music were as boundless as his political energy and activist spirit.
Brad Martin worked as my research assistant for the first edition, contributing everything 
from footnote corrections to substantive commentary. In preparation for the second edition, Craig Morrison offered challenging comments and a detailed review of the entire first edition. Students from my History of Rock ‘n’ Roll class at Tufts University contributed to the research for the second edition, including Ana Garnecho and Christina Lembo (teen pop), Lisa Wichter (women), Elise Podell (MP3), Matthew Baron (r&b), Mark Scholnick (rap), Laura Horstmann and Zach Berge (turntablism), Allie Schwartz and Alison Clarke (swing), and 
 
Suzanne Szwarc 
(Latin pop). More recent conversations with Kai Fikentscher, Murray Forman, and Deborah 
 
Pacini Hernandez have helped me to better understand electronic dance music, contemporary hip hop, and Latin(o) popular music, respectively. Marcus Breen gave the final chapter for the third edition a useful critical read. I am indebted to Andrew Ryan, my research assistant from UMass Boston, for his research contributions to the fourth edition, particularly in the area of hip hop. Raquel Z. Rivera, Wayne Marshall, and Deborah Pacini Hernandez were invaluable in shaping my understanding of reggaeton.
As to my own previous work, echoes of Rock ’n’ Roll Is Here to Pay, the book with which I 
was first identified, can certainly be detected in Rockin’ Out. In this instance, I owe a major debt of gratitude to senior author Steve Chapple, whose pioneering contributions to popular music studies helped define the field and pushed me to formulate my own views. My chapter on the his-tory of black popular music that appeared in Split Image, edited by Jannette Dates and 
 
William 
Barlow, informed the discussions of r&b, soul, and rap that appear in these pages. An earlier ver-sion of the discussion of popular music and the civil rights movement was published in 
 
Radical 
America and reprinted in my own Rockin’ the Boat. More detailed versions of my 
 
research on 
mega-events have appeared in Reimaging America, edited by Mark O’Brien and Craig Little; Technoculture, edited by Constance Penley and Andrew Ross; and Rockin’ the Boat. My research on censorship has been published in greater detail in the Journal of Popular Music Studies. It 
was originally funded by a grant from the Massachusetts Foundation for the 
 
Humanities and 
the Massachusetts Cultural Council, neither of which bear any responsibility for my opinions xii  ROCKIN ’ OUTon the subject. My research for the chapter on Internet music in Policing Pop, edited by Martin 
Cloonan and me, provided the basis for earlier discussions of peer-to-peer 
 
file-sharing networks. 
This work has been regularly revised and updated in Rockin’ Out. A 
 
version of my post-9/11 
research was published in Music in the Post-9/11 World, edited by Jonathan Ritter and J. Martin 
Daughtry.
The story of Rockin’ Out has been an interesting one for me. I continue to be indebted 
to Susannah Brabant for bringing the original book proposal to the attention of Bill Barke, then at Allyn and Bacon, who published the first edition. Subsequent editions have been pub-lished by Prentice Hall. (Those corporate mergers I write about are not limited to the music industry.) Copyright was transferred to me for the fourth edition, and the editorial baton was passed to Richard Carlin, who came to Prentice Hall as a seasoned editor with a wealth of valuable experience, a congenial style, and a willingness to think outside the box, all of which 
have been most appreciated. For the fifth edition, Richard allowed me to hire Leslie Cohen as developmental editor, who helped me navigate the first major overhaul of Rockin’ Out since it was first published in 1997. Her assistance in editing, reorganizing, and developing the book was invaluable in bringing the fifth edition to fruition, and her insight, astute analyses, and friendship have gone well beyond anything that could possibly have been specified in her scope of work. 
For the sixth edition, the editorial baton was passed twice more, first to Roth Wilkofsky 
and his assistant Chris Fegan, then to Ashley Dodge, with Project Manager Reena Dalal ably coordinating the day-to-day tasks of production, and Liz Kincaid and Ben Ferrini shepherding us through the wonderful new world of text and photo permissions, respectively.
As for me, I finally retired after thirty-three years at the College of Public and 
 
Community 
Service (CPCS) at UMass Boston, and underwent a successful heart valve repair six months later. Neither event has slowed me down; I am as active and busy as ever. To keep my sanity, I play drums and sing in two bands. The Blue Suede Boppers, a fifties rock ‘n’ roll band, has been delivering hot sounds from the Cold War for some 25 years now. In 2007, I joined a New Or-leans–style marching band called the Second Line Social Aid and Pleasure Society (SLSAPS) Brass Band. SLSAPS is an activist street band, devoted to inclusion, community building, and social justice. How cool is that? Every year, we host the HONK! Festival (check it out at honk-fest.org).
Then there is my family. Deborah Pacini Hernandez is not just my partner for life but also 
a colleague whose knowledge of popular music has added immeasurably to my own. Since the beginning of our relationship, she has offered perspective, insight, and criticism that have been incredibly valuable, and love and emotional support I can’t imagine living without. The family that I inherited from her, which includes daughter Radha and son Tai, continues to be a source of great joy and incredibly eclectic musical tastes. The fact that I still have my brother Gary and his family in my life eases the loss of our father in 1999 and our mother in 2004. Between those losses I was blessed with a granddaughter, Radha’s daughter Soleil. Now ten years old, she con-tinues to fill me with a sense of wonderment in the present and hope for the future.
Reebee Garofalo
February 2013 P REFACE  xiiiIt is a pleasure and an honor to have joined Reebee Garofalo as the co-author of Rockin’ 
Out—although needless to say, it has also been a lot of work. Textbooks on rock and popular 
music have proliferated in the years since the first edition of this book was published in 1997, 
but to my mind, Rockin’ Out remains the best such work available, especially for those seeking 
to take a social and historical approach to the music and its evolution. Although it is written as a textbook, Rockin’ Out has also always been meant to stand as a serious work of scholarship in its own right, and it is one of the few classroom texts to successfully earn such distinction. For me, then, the task at hand has been to update an already excellent piece of work in a way that preserves the high standard set by my co-author.
Reebee and I represent two different generations of scholarship on rock and popular 
music. When he published his first book on the subject in 1977—Rock ‘n’ Roll Is Here to Pay, co-written with Steve Chapple—there was hardly such a thing as rock scholarship. Along with 
Charles Hamm, Richard Peterson, Simon Frith, Dick Hebdige, and others who participated in the formation of the International Association for the Study of Popular Music, Reebee showed that scholarship on popular music was not a contradiction in terms but a necessary supplement to the work of nonacademic writers on the subject (much of which, of course, is of great value in its own right). By the time I reached graduate school in 1990, I had the benefit of consulting more than a decade’s worth of work by these figures.
What do I bring to this new edition of Rockin’ Out
 
? I would like to say that as the junior 
partner I bring a wealth of knowledge about recent and contemporary popular music that isn’t held by my colleague, but that is not really the case—for a retired professor, Reebee keeps up on contemporary trends surprisingly well. However, I do bring a distinctive sensibility to bear upon this subject matter. Although Rockin’ Out has been revised several times, its foundation 
was laid in the 1990s when it was originally written. There was much room to bring the mate-
rial in the book into more direct conversation with the past decade of popular music scholarship, and that is principally what I have sought to do.
Of course, popular music itself never stands still, and so the final chapters of the book 
have been revised more substantially than other parts. Although the general structure of the book retains the chronological shape it has always had, Chapters 11 and12 are now organized as much by theme as by time frame. Readers will find that Chapter 11 focuses primarily upon key stylistic developments in popular music from the 1990s to the present, while Chapter 12 puts more emphasis on changes in technology and in the organization of the music business 
 
during the same stretch of time. The distinction is not a hard-and-fast one—Chapter 12 devotes 
 
considerable space to the growth of electronic dance music, and also to the ways in which the events of September 11, 2001, affected popular music. Still, we felt that a new structure was nec-essary to do justice to some of the fundamental changes in the way that music is being bought, sold, and listened to in the twenty-first century.
If it is not already clear, I would like to thank Reebee for inviting me to become his co-
 
author. He has been incredibly supportive and generous, given that in many instances I have been rewriting or cutting words of his that have stood intact for more than fifteen years. He and his wife Deborah Pacini Hernandez are the nicest and coolest people to ever have earned the status of academic power couple (and the fact that they will probably hate the fact that I call them such is just more testament to their coolness).xiv  ROCKIN ’ OUTReebee has already named all the essential personnel at Pearson, but his thanks are worth 
repeating. Roth Wilkofsky and Christopher Fegan helped to get this new edition moving and to 
bring me into the fold. Ashley Dodge and Reena Dalal have offered crucial support in bringing 
this edition of the book to fruition. Ben Ferrini and Liz Kincaid provided essential advice and 
assistance in navigating the new world of permissions. And Angela Mariani-Smith provided us with some great new listening guides for the book under a very tight deadline.
I was able to do the initial work toward this sixth edition of Rockin’ Out during a sab-
batical provided by my home institution, Smith College. Although like all institutions of higher learning Smith has been rethinking its priorities in recent years, it remains a liberal arts college that supports faculty research in important ways, and for that I am grateful. I am also grateful to have colleagues like Peter Bloom, Floyd Cheung, Rick Millington, Kevin Rozario, Margaret Sarkissian, Richard Sherr, Ruth Solie (now retired), and Michael Thurston, who help me to 
bridge the worlds of music and American studies in which I dwell.
During the writing of this book I married the love of my life, Holly Mott, after nearly nine 
years of unwedded happiness. The happiness remains, but now fortified with that extra measure of trust and confidence that marriage can bring. And as an added benefit I can now officially call her daughter, Devon Kelley-Mott, my stepdaughter, without feeling like I’m stretching the truth. At home or in the car we do not always agree on the preferred playlist—I lean toward heavy guitars and wailing horns; they gravitate more toward acoustic instruments and strong female vocals. But we make our own, strange harmony, and it works.
Steve Waksman
February 2013
New to This Edition
•
  
New co-author - Steve Waksman, professor at Smith College and heavily published rock 
scholar has been brought on as co-author for the 6th edition.
• 
 
Listening Guides - New listening guides have been added to the final chapters of the new 
edition, enhancing discussion of key artists like Lady Gaga and influential genres such as 
electronic dance music.
• 
 
New Material - Addition of engaging and informative new material – especially in punk, 
rap and metal, as well as the current scene and the future of music – without adding length or losing the thread of earlier editions.
• 
 
Updated sources - Story narrative and sources updated and enhanced throughout. A deeper analysis with characteristically accessible prose.
• 
 
Comprehensible - Final chapters significantly reorganized to present a more readable arc of history.  
• 
 
MySearchLab - MySearchLab can be packaged with this new edition. MySearchLab with Pearson eText contains a collection of tools and resources that can help students in any course. It is designed with one single purpose — to improve the academic success of all higher education students, one student at a time.
This text is available in a variety of formats—digital and print. To learn more about our pro-
grams, pricing options, and customization, visit www.pearsonhighered.com.  1
  
In our view, popular music cannot be fully understood   
simply as a stand-alone musical text and then measured against some 
abstract aesthetic notion of quality. Although it is important to explore 
the specificities of the music itself, it is equally important to recognize 
that the text is as much a product of its social and political context as any individual’s creativity or talent. Because the economics of popularity 
matters, we attach a certain amount of importance to sales data. Rockin’ Out: Popular Music in the U.S.A. is peppered with popularity chart listings and references to “gold” and “platinum” records (the sale of 500,000 and 1 million album units, respectively). At the same time, we are aware that commercially successful artists and records may or may not be the most influential or culturally important. Qualitative indicators such as historical accounts, musical analyses, critical reviews, and audience reactions must also play a role in the analysis.
Because the enslavement and oppression of African Americans and resulting cultural 
interactions have had such a profound effect on the development of our popular music, our 
inclination is to view popular music first through the lens of race and racism. Accordingly, Rockin’ Out begins with a discussion of nineteenth-century blackface minstrelsy and its con -
troversial appropriation of African American culture for the primary benefit of a largely Eu-ropean American market. In minstrelsy, we see the development of a troubling, yet defining, aspect of the early popular music business that carried forward well into the twentieth century, wherein white audiences and performers fashioned alternate identities for themselves out of African American styles, while giving black artists little credit for their creations. There are also important patterns based on other crucial demographic variables, such as age, gender, and ethnicity. Technological advances and the political economy of the industry have had a great 
impact in shaping the development of popular music. Finally, popular music invariably develops 
in relation to the prevailing political climate in a given era. These, then, are the themes that run throughout this book.Introduction: 
Definitions, Themes, and Issues2 rock I n’ ou TWhile this book covers well over one hundred years of popular music history, its primary 
focus begins in the second half of the twentieth century. The pivotal moment in this history 
was the emergence of rock ‘n’ roll in the 1950s, as the transition from Tin Pan Alley pop to 
rock ‘n’ roll revealed important social and cultural shifts in 
u
.S. society. If the music of Tin Pan 
Alley was lighthearted and urbane, the rock ‘n’ roll of the 1950s was heavy-handed and urban. 
While Tin Pan Alley appealed to middle-class sensibilities, rock ‘n’ roll was decidedly working class in its orientation. Whereas Tin Pan Alley made no particular age distinctions among its listeners, rock ‘n’ roll was targeted at youth. Tin Pan Alley was identified with sheet music in the same way that rock ‘n’ roll was associated with records, and this difference signified the be-ginning of an inextricable connection between popular music and advanced recording technol-ogy. Finally, the music of Tin Pan Alley evolved according to a European American paradigm of music making, even when it incorporated other cultural influences. In contrast, rock ‘n’ roll 
turned dramatically toward a more unruly, hybrid mix of African American and white South -
ern conventions. In short, the rock ‘n’ roll that emerged in the 1950s combined all the elements that would define the broad parameters of popular music in the 
u
nited States for at least the 
next forty years.
Into the Twentieth Century:  
Popular Music and Mass Culture
In its association with sheet music, Tin Pan Alley can be seen as a descendant of a popular cul-
ture that dates back to the invention of the printing press in fifteenth-century Europe.1 More 
broadly, Tin Pan Alley marked the growth of a new system of mass production in the realm of popular music. Song publishers promoted their products through intensive publicity, plugging 
songs to performing artists whose rendition on stage could stoke the desire among consumers 
to purchase the sheet music for their own domestic enjoyment.
2
When the music of Tin Pan Alley emerged, popular music had only recently been dis-
tinguished from both folk music and folk culture on the one hand, and classical or art music 
and high culture on the other. These distinctions evolved from our inheritance that came with 
European colonization, but only came into modern usage over the course of the nineteenth 
century.3 Historically, folk culture has been associated with the poor and those lacking formal 
education. It was a collective and participatory culture, shared by a particular community of 
people. The music arising from it was comparatively simple in form and structure, performed 
by nonprofessionals, and passed along, usually anonymously, in oral tradition. Its production 
and consumption were noncommercial. At the other end of the European cultural spectrum was high culture, which was associated with the ruling classes—the feudal aristocracy, the cap-italist bourgeoisie. Its music was more complicated in form and structure and was composed by paid professionals who were commissioned through a system of patronage. Because this music was notated (written down), it required a certain literacy and training for its performance. High culture thus imposed a separation between artists and consumers that was unknown in folk culture. What was a community in folk culture was an audience in high culture. As the official culture of court and church, high culture was considered to be superior to folk culture. In T roduc TI on  3Popular culture insinuated itself between folk culture and high culture as a third cultural 
category, a hybrid that was distinguishable from both but borrowed freely from each as needed. 
Tin Pan Alley provides an excellent example of these contradictory tendencies. In attempting 
to cater exclusively to popular (albeit narrow mainstream) tastes, Tin Pan Alley writers con-
sciously sought to construct an alternative to the cultural dominance of European art music. In the process, these writers incorporated influences from a wide range of sources, including a number of African American genres. At the same time, however, they often took their cues from classical music and high culture. For example, the 1941 melody of “Tonight We Love,” a popular song by 
r
ay Austin and Bobby Worth, was lifted almost note for note from the 
first movement of Tchaikovsky’s Piano Concerto No. 1. In leaning heavily on upper-middle-class themes and images—dining at the 
r
itz, performing in black tie and tails—Tin Pan Alley 
writers further (and perhaps unwittingly) allied themselves with the high culture they sought 
to displace. High culture advocates did not always welcome this alliance, however, and as the products of Tin Pan Alley became more ubiquitous, they were often condemned as noise, a cor-ruption of more refined musical sensibilities.
4
The invention of new mass communication technologies—records, radio, film, and even-
tually television—inserted yet another distinction into the cultural lexicon, namely, the con-
cept of mass culture. The new term indicated cultural dissemination on a scale that increased 
by orders of magnitude. The question of scale had important implications for qualitative judg -
ments about mass culture. Prior to its advent, it was possible to consider popular culture as 
historically continuous with folk culture, either slowly replacing folk cultures as the next stage of development following the Industrial 
r
evolution or coexisting with rural or industrial folk 
cultures in the modern era. With the introduction of mass media, however, the idea of a con -
tinuing historical progression came to an abrupt halt. In the eyes of most observers, the emer-gence of mass culture was accompanied by a subtle but important shift in orientation from a culture of the people to a culture for  the masses. In this deceptively simple change, there was 
a profound transformation of meaning. Mass culture was not seen as the lived culture of an 
identifiable group of people. Instead, it was a commodified culture produced by a centralized, corporate culture industry for privatized, passive consumption by an alienated, undifferentiated mass.
5 Thus, although the terms mass culture and popular culture are often used interchan  geably 
today, most observers tended to distinguish between the two in language that was pejorative 
and/or politically charged until well into the 1960s. In 1959, for example, 
o
scar Handlin, 
among others, argued forcefully against “the misconception that the ‘mass culture’ of the pres-
ent is but an extension of the popular culture of the past.”6 Indeed, as late as 1965, Stuart Hall 
and Paddy Whannel maintained that “the typical ‘art’ of the mass media today is not a continu-ity from, but a corruption of, popular art.”
7
rock ‘n’ roll, of course, could be numbered among the victims of this largely false distinc-
tion. As an unabashedly commercial product clearly intended for mass consumption, most crit-ics dismissed the music as inferior and unworthy of serious consideration. To avoid the mass 
culture stigma, critics and historians in the 1960s who became invested in the cultural impor-
tance of rock as the mature form of rock ‘n’ roll tended to characterize the music as something other than what it was. Historian 
c
arl Belz, for example, argued that “rock is a part of the 
long tradition of folk art in the 
u
nited States and throughout the world.”8As the music took 4 rock I n’ ou Ta turn toward greater sophistication, this characterization underwent further change. d iscus-
sions of Bob 
d
ylan’s lyrics as poetry and the Beatles’ Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band as 
art reflected an attempt by some to “elevate” rock from folk music to art, thereby allying it with 
high culture. At the time, these efforts to categorize rock represented genuine attempts to un-
derstand the place of popular music in the hierarchy of cultural practices. 
u
ltimately, however, 
there was no getting around the fact that rock was both a popular music and a mass cultural form. In 1981, music sociologist Simon Frith, among others, dismissed both earlier positions of rock as folk and rock as art. “
r
ock is a commercially made mass music,” he asserted, “and 
this must be the starting point for its celebration as well as its dismissal.”9 More recently, the 
philosopher Bernard Gendron provocatively claimed that rock’s domination has been cultural 
as well as economic, and that it has not become high art so much as made the values of high 
culture less relevant. 
r
ock won the culture war by establishing a new system of value in which 
“high” and “low” no longer mattered as they did before.10
Rock ‘n’ Roll: The Birth of a New Era
The straightforward commercialism and mass appeal of rock ‘n’ roll did not set it apart from 
other popular music. What made rock ‘n’ roll different was its urban orientation, focus on youth culture, appeal to working-class sensibilities, and relationship to technology and African 
American musical influences and performance styles. As 
c
harlie Gillett argued in his classic 
studyThe Sound of the City, rock ‘n’ roll was the first popular genre to incorporate the relent-
less pulse and sheer volume of urban life into the music itself. In his words, “
r
ock and 
r
oll was 
perhaps the first form of popular culture to celebrate without reservation characteristics of city life that had been among the most criticized.”
11 Here Gillett was referring to urban sounds that 
were perceived as “brutal and oppressive.” In this world of droning machines, post–World War 
II adolescents “staked out their freedom . . . inspired and reassured by the rock and roll beat.”12
Gillett’s conflation of adolescence and rock ‘n’ roll highlights the fact that the emer-
gence of the music as a genre coincided with the beginnings of youth culture as a phenomenon. 
d
ue to the convergence of a number of social forces in the 1950s, including postwar affluence 
and a demographic shift in the population toward youth, teenagers became an identifiable con-
sumer group and one that possessed an ample amount of disposable income. The music indus-try learned, albeit not without considerable resistance, that targeting the musical tastes of this generation could be quite lucrative. As Simon Frith noted:
The young had always had idols—film stars, sportsmen, singers like Frank Sinatra and Johnny 
Ray; the novelty of rock ‘n’ roll was that its performers were the same age as their audience, came from similar backgrounds, had similar interests; and the rise of rock ‘n’ roll meant a generation gap. . . . Rock ‘n’ roll records and radio shows were aimed exclusively at the young, . . . and by the end of the 1950s most pop records were being bought by the young.
13
Following the eruption of rock ‘n’ roll, the music industry identified young people as the 
primary audience for popular music. The change took hold gradually; throughout the later 
years of the 1950s rock ‘n’ roll jockeyed for position on the sales charts with pop that was  In T roduc TI on  5produced to suit adult tastes. o nly with the rise of the Beatles did the tastes of young listeners 
truly come to dominate the wider pop landscape, but the groundwork for this shift was laid by 
the events of the preceding decade.14
If rock ‘n’ roll was different from other forms of popular music in its unique relationship 
to youth, its connection to technology also set it apart. The electric guitar, for example, had been around for some two decades by the time of rock ‘n’ roll’s emergence in the 1950s. How -
ever, rock ‘n’ roll coincided with decisive changes in the manner in which the electric guitar was 
played and the kinds of sounds that it was used to create. In the late 1940s and early 1950s, an electric guitar aesthetic was developing in which players capitalized on the creative use of am-plified sound. In blues, players like Muddy Waters and Howlin’ Wolf sideman Willie Johnson turned their low-wattage amplifiers as high as they could go and generated the first stirrings of distortion that would come to define the electric guitar’s sound in rock. In mainstream pop, the guitarist and inventor Les Paul used a key innovation, the solid body electric guitar, to achieve a level of tonal purity that made the instrument sound dramatically different from its acoustic counterpart, especially when filtered through the range of effects Paul created through 
his equally innovative use of multiple track recording techniques. Following from these efforts, early rock ‘n’ roll guitarists such as 
c
huck Berry and Scotty Moore combined the coarse, dis-
torted tone pioneered by African American blues guitarists with a level of dexterity and me -
lodic invention that owed no small debt to jazz, and gave rock ‘n’ roll a distinctly modern edge.15
Sound recording was another area in which rock ‘n’ roll performers and producers took 
full advantage of available technology. Initially, recording was thought of as a documentary 
process that sought only to preserve the quality of a live performance. Thus, while the success 
of popular music—even the music of Tin Pan Alley—depended to a large extent on mass com-
munication technologies, these technologies were used in the dissemination of the music rather than its creation. A major breakthrough to a new sensibility concerning sound recording came with the advent of multiple track recording, heard to best advantage in the wave of successful records created by Les Paul starting with his 1947 release “Lover.” Layering eight tracks of his own guitar work, one upon the next, by connecting two disc recording lathes together in his Southern 
c
alifornia workshop, Paul demonstrated that a record could be something much 
different than a direct representation of a performance.16 It could produce sounds that were 
physically impossible to create through more conventional means. With multiple tracks at their 
disposal, recording artists could let their audio imaginations run wild as never before.
Following the example set by Paul and others, rock ‘n’ roll incorporated the capabilities of 
advanced recording technology into the creative process itself. 
r
ock ‘n’ roll records consciously 
used the technical features of echo, editing, overdubbing, and multitracking to alter the reality 
of the performance. “Technical processes,” as musicologist Peter Wicke has said, “became musi-cal opportunities.”
17 Thus, the emergence of rock ‘n’ roll was characterized by a progressively 
more intimate relationship with the technologies used in its production and dissemination. This 
relationship continued as rock ventured toward art in the 1960s. Phil Spector became perhaps 
the first record producer to be understood as an artist in his own right, apart from the musicians 
that he recorded. Brian Wilson of the Beach Boys and the members of the Beatles, working with producer George Martin, created popular recordings of unprecedented sonic complexity, cul-minating in the 1967 release of Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band, an album so dependent on 6 rock I n’ ou Tstudio technology that it couldn’t be performed live. d isco furthered popular music’s immersion 
in technological wizardry, becoming almost completely a product of the studio; rap has pushed 
the envelope even more, first by using dual turntables as musical instruments, and then by using 
samplers, sequencers, and programmable drum machines as essential tools of the trade. To the 
extent that these creative uses of technology have been accepted as artistically valid, they have pushed the very definition of popular music beyond a traditional European conception of music as a pattern of notes toward a conception of music as organized sound.
Beginning with early rock ‘n’ roll, advanced technologies were married to musical ele-
ments that in themselves separated the music from earlier forms of mainstream popular music along lines of class and race. The prominence of rhythm, immoderate volume, slurred notes, grainy vocals, aggressive attack, and vernacular speech that characterized rock ‘n’ roll tended to place the music outside the reach of middle-class culture and beyond the purview of con-
ventional musicological investigation, which historically derived its main categories of inves-tigation from the “notated” tradition of European art music. Within the parameters valued by official tastemakers—melody, harmony, structure—rock ‘n’ roll was found wanting. However, as 
r
ichard Middleton has pointed out:
The formulaic processes operate within parameters relatively highly valued by traditional musi-
cology: harmony, melodic shape, basic rhythm pattern. V ariant processes, on the other hand, often take place in parameters little valued by traditional musicology (and much harder to notate): slight 
pitch inflection or rhythmic variation, timbre and timbre changes, accent, and attack.
18
The subtlety and sophistication of rock ‘n’ roll, then, were to be found in features of the music 
that were outside the frame of reference of the cultural elite.
Analyses of structure, melody, and chord progressions, of course, are not without value. 
They can offer important insights into the differences existing between popular music and 
other forms of music, as well as differences among popular genres themselves. 
r
ock ‘n’ roll 
and Tin Pan Alley pop, for example, can be distinguished in these terms. However, a surface analysis of these elements alone cannot adequately capture the disjuncture that characterized the transition between the two. To get to this level of analysis, it is necessary to examine the full range of cultural practices and performance styles that comprised these respective musical eras. The ascendancy of Tin Pan Alley coincided with the emergence of a number of African American genres and subgenres, including ragtime, blues, boogie woogie, and jazz. There was considerable crossover between these styles in musical terms: Tin Pan Alley writers drew on 
the syncopated rhythms of ragtime and jazz, and African American musicians commonly drew upon the harmonic changes of Tin Pan Alley.
d
espite the routine character of these exchanges, Tin Pan Alley appropriations were, 
by and large, superficial adaptations—what musicologist 
c
harles Hamm has called “a touch of 
exotic seasoning”19—that were incorporated into an aesthetic framework defined by the Euro-
pean tradition. This, of course, was reassuring to some. It preserved the centrality of Western  
civilization and kept upstart African American artists in check. 
c
onservative culture critic  
H. F . Mooney, for example, considered it fortunate that the influence of African American 
 
music 
was “limited by compromises with middle class conventions” and delighted in the fact that it 
was “‘polished’ . . . so as to conform to the standards of European rendition.”20 revealing his  In T roduc TI on  7bias further, Mooney noted, “The highest compliment most of the public could pay to big-band 
jazz between 1928 and 1950 was ‘symphonic’ or ‘advanced.’”21
rock ‘n’ roll, however, turned this situation on its head. By all accounts, the eruption 
of rock ‘n’ roll entailed a profound shift in cultural values on the part of mainstream youth, a shift away from European American sensibilities and toward African American ones. The most 
important feature of this shift was an increased emphasis on rhythm. In the words of 
c
hristo-
pher Small, “
r
hythm is to the African musician what harmony is to the European—the central 
organizing principle of the art.”22 Although in the slave cultures of the Americas, this African 
tradition was complicated by considerable pressure to adopt European ways of music making 
(indeed the history of African American music is fraught with this tension), rock ‘n’ roll is 
clearly descended from the tradition of organizing musical elements around a recurring rhyth-
mic structure. In its early years, rock ‘n’ roll was often referred to as the Big Beat. With the ascent of rock ‘n’ roll, this “central organizing principle” came to define mainstream popular music in a way that it never had before.
The orientation toward an African American aesthetic also affected musical elements 
such as structure, chord patterns, and scales, as well as the more subtle features mentioned earlier. As music historian Iain 
c
hambers has written, from the vantage point of European 
classical harmony, the twelve-bar, three-chord format of the blues is highly limited, as is the pentatonic or “blues” scale, which employs only five notes as compared with the seven that are 
conventional to European scale patterns. Yet African American blues singers used these limita-tions to their advantage, extending notes into unexpected pitch areas that sound “foreign” to ears trained in Western harmony, and adding “slides, slurs, bent, ‘dirty’ and uncertain notes in the voice, guitar, saxophone and bass” that attested to “the clash between a legitimised white European-derived tradition and a barely recognised Afro-American one.”
23 While there had 
been an awareness of African American influences among white jazz musicians and Tin Pan 
Alley composers, rock ‘n’ roll pushed performers toward the wholesale adoption of an African 
American orientation. According to Peter Wicke, white rock ‘n’ roll artists like Elvis Presley 
and Bill Haley no longer merely adapted African American musical practices to their own aes-thetic ideas, as Tin Pan Alley composers had done. Instead, they sought to reproduce the most characteristic features of African American music on its own terms.
24
If rock ‘n’ roll tipped the cultural balance toward an African American aesthetic, it was 
also a music defined by its hybridity. Indeed, what rock critic Greil Marcus has termed “racial 
confusion” may be a more appropriate way to characterize the affect of rock ‘n’ roll on race rela-
tions and perceptions than a clear orientation toward “black” or “white” values.25 While Elvis 
Presley clearly drew on African American performance styles, he adopted the instrumentation 
of country music and was also driven by pop tendencies that were entirely consistent with Tin 
Pan Alley values. Still, his sound was “black” enough that when he appeared on Memphis radio 
to promote his first record, 
d
. J. 
d
ewey Phillips made sure to have Presley mention where he 
went to high school so that knowing listeners would correctly perceive his whiteness. 
c
huck 
Berry self-consciously drew upon the “hillbilly” styles then current in his native St. Louis to develop an appeal that cut across racial lines. His first single, “Maybellene,” stirred such confu-sion due to its country trappings that he was hired by a Southern club to perform, only to be denied entry to the same club upon showing up because they had mistakenly assumed him to 8 rockIn’ ouTbe white based on the sound of his record.26 Berry and Sam cooke, as well as many doo-wop 
groups, enunciated clearly enough to pass muster with the harshest diction teacher. Indeed, 
doo-wop harmonies and vocal styles defy any attempt to analyze rock ‘n’ roll solely in terms of race as they exemplify the ways in which European and African American musical elements can freely intermingle to the point where they become all but inextricable from one another.
Since the advent of rock ‘n’ roll, there has been a continuing debate regarding the relative 
proportions of African American and European American influences in popular music. It was considered a mark of distinction by some critics that many of the San Francisco groups of the late 1960s did not sound like they were emulating African American performance styles, even though some of the leading white artists of the decade—such as the r olling Stones, Eric clap-
ton, and Janis Joplin—were explicitly indebted to black influences. In the 1970s, progressive rock made its musical statement by looking to classical European influences. Heavy metal and punk also appeared to distance themselves from overt references to rock’s African American base, although punks in the u .k. did link themselves with Afro-caribbean music in ways that 
had both artistic and political overtones. “Black” and “white” pop styles became polarized in the 1970s to the extent that the black funk/rock band Funkadelic saw fit to title one of its songs, “Who Says a Funk Band can’t Play r ock?” In the united States, even disco was marked by the 
tension between funk and soft soul influences on the one hand, and Eurodisco on the other. Popular music has been re-Africanized in rap and hip-hop culture, which has concentrated pri-marily on heavy beats and spoken word rhymes, eschewing melody almost completely. Yet rap’s sample-based aesthetic also incorporates a diverse and eclectic range of sources and so pro-vides a complex, multifaceted model of fashioning racial identities through musical means.
Marketing and the Politics of Race,  
Language, and Gender
If rock ‘n’ roll represented the movement of African American culture further into the mainstream 
of popular tastes, it did not automatically follow that African Americans would be the main benefi-ciaries of this transformation. The way in which music unfolds as a social practice does not neces-sarily determine the way in which it reaches the ears of its audience. By the time a creative urge has been handled by the culture industry, all the biases of class, race, and gender have been brought to bear. Although rock ‘n’ roll proceeded from an aesthetic impulse that viewed cultural borrowing as both natural and desirable, it developed in a commercial context where the ordinary process of cultural borrowing can become theft, and artists can be categorized incorrectly or excluded from the marketplace altogether for reasons that have little to do with talent or musical style.
The marketing categories of the music industry have often classified performers as much 
by race as by musical style. Blackface minstrelsy set a pattern as early as the 1840s whereby “black music” would be shown to have great commercial value, but African American per-formers had little to do with its public performance and so received almost no financial re-ward for its success. only in the 1890s did significant numbers of African Americans enter the ranks of professional performance. Even then, they were expected to personify roles that had been first carved out by white performers in blackface, and music associated with African 
M00_GARO6807_06_SE_INTRO.indd   8 6/19/13   11:08 AM In T roduc TI on  9Americans—which included ragtime as well as more standard Tin Pan Alley fare—circulated 
under the general, derogatory heading of “coon songs.”
In the first decades of the twentieth century, the continued rise in the numbers of black 
performing artists coincided with the growth of recording as an increasingly dominant sector 
of the commercial music industry. Few African American artists recorded during the first two decades of the new century,
27 but 1920 marked something of a watershed, when the success of 
Mamie Smith’s “
c
razy Blues” demonstrated the potential of records made by black artists for 
black listeners. Subsequently, the music industry of the 1920s organized popular music into  
three categories: “race” (African American popular music); “hillbilly” (white working-class 
 
rural styles); and “popular” (mainstream pop of the type produced by Tin Pan Alley).28 Initially, 
Billboard, the leading music industry trade magazine, published popularity charts for only that 
music classified as “popular” by the industry. However, when Your Hit Parade, a radio program 
based on (and shaped by) listener preferences, became one of the most popular programs in the 
country in 1935, it became apparent that the commercial interests of the industry were not being served by only one chart. Thus, by the end of the decade, Billboard had inaugurated a 
popularity chart for hillbilly music and in 1942 added a chart titled “The Harlem Hit Parade.” Three years later, the magazine changed this title to “
r
ace Music.”
Each marketing category was presumed to be a distinct musical style with its own audi-
ence. “The assumed mainstream pop audience,” according to 
d
avid Brackett, “was northern, 
urban, middle or upper class, and also white. The charts for the marginal musics also assumed an audience—African American for race and r&b [rhythm and blues], rural southern white for 
hillbilly, folk, and country and western (as these charts were variously designated during the 1940s).”
29 dividing “black” and “white” styles into different sectors of the market, the record-
ing industry repressed an existing tradition of cross-racial exchange that had characterized 
the realm of vernacular music making, especially in the American South. Indeed, some have 
argued that the recording industry intensified the segregation of music along racial lines.30 not 
until the social and cultural changes brought about by World War II did the barriers between 
marketing categories become a bit more porous. As the categories “race” and “hillbilly” began 
to come to the attention of the mainstream audience, these styles were said to cross over.
The term crossover refers to that process whereby an artist or a recording from a second-
ary or specialty marketing category, such as country and western (c&w) or rhythm and blues 
(r&b), achieves hit status in the mainstream market. Although recently the term has been used simply to indicate multiple chart listings in any direction, historically it connoted movement from a marginal category to the mainstream. In writing of the golden years of r&b, music his -
torian Arnold Shaw has noted:
The crossover concept was inherent in R&B from the start. In fact, acceptance by the pop market 
of an R&B disk (Cecil Gant’s “I Wonder”) generated the first mushrooming of R&B record com-panies. While these labels produced disks basically for ghetto consumption, they always hoped that 
the larger white market might be receptive.
31
The greater acceptance of African Americans in the mainstream market after World War II 
not only prompted some changes in music charting practices but also put the industry on the horns of a racial dilemma that has been the subject of heated debate ever since.10 rock I n’ ou TAs late as 1949, most of the music by African American artists could be found under 
the heading Race Music in record company catalogues. As this music began to cross over to 
the white market, however, it was decided that a more palatable term was needed. Eventually 
rhythm and blues (reportedly coined by Jerry Wexler at Billboard) became the accepted term, 
and from 1949 until 1963, Billboard charted the music as such.32 Billboard discontinued its r&b 
charts from the end of 1963 until the beginning of 1965, presumably because the pop charts 
were becoming increasingly integrated. 
d
uring this time, however, the number of African 
American artists on the pop charts actually declined. Accordingly, the r&b charts were rein-
stated by the magazine, and in 1969, r&b was replaced with the term soul. The industry came full circle in 1982 when the soul charts were renamed black music. Billboard later offered the ex-
planation that “‘soul’ was too limited a term to define the diversity of musical styles appearing on the chart, and that ‘black’ was a better tribute to the music’s cultural origins.”
33 ultimately, 
however, this term was as vulnerable to criticism as the term race music  had been four decades 
earlier. Thus in 1990, Billboard reinstated the r&b category, explaining that it was “becoming 
less acceptable to identify music in racial terms.”34 And the beat goes on. . . .
Were it not for this artificial separation of the races, popular music history might read 
quite differently. When Syd 
n
athan, the founder of 
k
ing 
r
ecords, encouraged his r&b and c&w 
artists to record different versions of the same songs, he understood intuitively that pieces of 
music do not automatically have a genre, that they can be interpreted in many idioms. Still, in keeping with prevailing industry practices, he marketed his r&b releases only to black audi -
ences and his country records only to white audiences. While 
n
athan was not limited in his 
choice of artists or material, he, like many others, accepted the notion that a separation of the races was “the way things were.” These same prevailing industry practices may have led Leon-ard 
c
hess, head of 
c
hess 
r
ecords, to add “the rock beat of the 
c
hicago blues” to 
c
huck Berry’s 
more country-oriented audition performance of “Ida 
r
ed” (“Maybellene”).35 chess was quite 
aware of the difficulties of marketing a black man as a country singer. Were it not for that real-
ity, 
c
huck Berry might well have had a very different career trajectory.
Such music marketing practices were briefly challenged when 
r
ay 
c
harles recorded 
Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music (Volume I) and Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music (Volume II) for AB
c
-Paramount in 1962. Through these recordings, 
c
harles 
proved that an artist does not have to be limited to a single performance style and that a 
song can have more than one genre. He had long felt connections between the blues and country that rendered the rigid separation of markets suspect from a musical point of view. “I really thought that it was somethin’ about country music, even as a youngster,” 
c
harles 
once remarked. “I always . . . felt the closest music, really, to the blues [was country and 
western]. They’d make them steel guitars cry and whine, and it really attracted me.”36 
These long-playing records (LPs) turned out to be the two best-selling albums of his career. 
Volume I made the pop charts for fifty-nine weeks and was firmly ensconced in the num-
ber one slot for fourteen of them. The album also contained a recording of his best-selling 
single—
d
on Gibson’s “I 
c
an’t Stop Loving You”—which went to number one on all three 
charts, perhaps the only record by an African American artist ever to do so. Even so, it was not until the end of the decade that another African American artist—
c
harlie Pride—made 
the country charts. In T roduc TI on  11The identification of music with race, which has tended to exclude African American 
artists and others from certain marketing structures in the music industry, makes the task of 
unearthing an accurate history of 
u
.S. popular music quite difficult and encourages serious un-
derestimates of the degree of cross-cultural collaboration that has taken place. For example, 
rockabilly, the country strain of rock ‘n’ roll in the 1950s, was a legitimate musical movement that integrated blues with country and western styles. It had its own identity, and in singers such as Elvis Presley, 
c
arl Perkins, and Jerry Lee Lewis, performers of real originality and tal-
ent. But because rockabilly was one strand of a musical transformation that was most heavily indebted to African American culture, it is impossible to separate its popularity from a racist pattern in which styles pioneered by black artists are popularized, dominated, and even defined by whites as if they were the originators. As a result, efforts to interpret its significance often fall into contradictory claims about its racial character. In 1984, 
n
ick Tosches insisted that “rocka-
billy is hillbilly rock-and-roll. It was not a usurpation of black music by whites because its soul, 
its pneuma, was white, full of the redneck ethos.”37 Arnold Shaw had acknowledged a decade 
earlier that “it was that to a degree,” but he went on to say that “it would probably be more ac-
curate to describe [rockabilly] as the sound of young, white Southerners imitating black blues-
men.”38 However one interprets the cultural influences that defined rockabilly as a phenomenon, 
there is no question that it was promoted as a distinctly white Southern phenomenon, and that 
it did much to further the association of early rock ‘n’ roll with white faces rather than black.
Five decades after rock ‘n’ roll’s emergence, a milestone was reached on the American 
sales charts: on 
o
ctober 11, 2003, all of the top ten spots on Billboard’s Hot 100 chart (which 
measures best-selling pop singles) were taken by African American performers associated 
with the rap and r&b genres.39 This occurrence was the result of the changes that had fol-
lowed from the rise of rap music and hip-hop culture to a position of commercial dominance 
from the mid-1990s forward. If rock ‘n’ roll’s emergence represented a crucial moment in 
popular music history when African American styles became more central to the commer-
cial mainstream, rap has pushed that process several further steps forward. A major differ-ence between the rock ‘n’ roll moment of the 1950s and early 1960s and the rap moment of the 1990s and early twenty-first century is that rap has remained primarily identified with black performers even as it has come to occupy a central place in popular taste. That several African Americans have also achieved prominence on the business end of rap, from early 
d
ef Jam records figurehead 
r
ussell Simmons to recently departed 
d
ef Jam president Jay-Z, 
offers further testimony to the major changes that rap has brought to the workings of the 
popular music industry. This is not to say that full equality has been established or that rac-
ism no longer shapes the workings of the industry. Still, enough has changed to offer reason to think that rap has prompted a significant paradigm shift in the way that race informs the marketing of popular music.
No Hablamos Español: The Language Barrier
Because of this country’s history of slavery, there is a tendency to think of racism, whether in 
the music industry or society as a whole, as a black/white issue. It should be recognized, how-ever, that discriminatory practices have not been limited to African Americans alone. In many 12 rock I n’ ou Tways, the language barrier has proven to be even more intractable than the race barrier. Latin 
music, for instance, has always been an important influence in 
u
.S. popular music. In the 1950s, 
a series of mambos, rumbas, and cha-chas were popular. Indeed, from 
r
itchie Valens to San -
tana to Los Lobos, there has always been a strong Latino presence in rock and a recognizable 
Latin influence in dance styles, from disco to hip hop. Less overtly, one can hear variations on the 
c
uban-based clave rhythm (three short beats followed by a pause and then two more short 
beats, or the same pattern reversed) as a major element in such seemingly non-Latin songs as “Louie Louie” and the 
r
olling Stones’ “Satisfaction.”40 But even with the reggaeton boom in 
the mid-2000s, the number of Top Forty pop hits sung in Spanish in the 
u
nited States could 
probably be counted on one hand. “La Bamba” (by 
r
itchie Valens and Los Lobos) and Santana’s 
“
o
ye 
c
omo Va” readily come to mind, and more recently 
d
addy Yankee’s “Gasolina,” but pre-
cious few others.
o
ne could probably tally all of the non-English Top Forty pop hits on two hands. Four 
versions of “Volare” appeared on the charts, as did “
d
ominique” by the Singing 
n
un. 
k
yu Saka-
moto’s “Sukiyaki” was covered by Taste of Honey during the disco era. These are exceptions that prove the rule: non-English hits in the 
u
nited States are rare. As a result, artists who 
might sing in other languages feel compelled to record in English when they approach the 
u
.S. 
market. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, Spanish balladeer Julio Iglesias, a resident of the 
u
nited States, was among the best-selling recording artists in the world, but he had never had 
a hit in this country. The only way he could break into the 
u
.S. market was with two English 
duets—one with Willie 
n
elson (“To All the Girls I’ve Loved Before”) and one with 
d
iana 
r
oss  
(“ All of You”), both in 1984. Linda 
r
onstadt, who achieved 
u
.S. superstardom singing in Eng-
lish, provides an example of this logic in reverse. In 1988, 
r
onstadt, who is part Mexican, 
 
returned to her roots to record Canciones de Mi Padre. The album never reached the 
u
.S. pop Top  
Forty, even though it received the 1988 Grammy for Best Mexican/American Performance. 
c
uban-born Gloria Estefan’s Top Ten pop album Cuts Both Ways (1989) included Spanish and 
English versions of “
d
on’t Wanna Lose You” and “Here We Are,” but only the English ver-
sions became Top Ten pop hits. The Swedish group ABBA charted fourteen Top Forty hits in 
the 
u
nited States in the 1970s and 1980s, but all were sung in English. When French 
c
ana-
dian 
c
eline 
d
ion, a veteran of the Quebec music scene, made a bid for international stardom 
in 1990, she did so on the basis of her first all-English LP , Unison. In 1993, she scored her first number one pop hit in the 
u
nited States with “The Power of Love,” which was, of course, sung 
in English.
For the moment, language barriers in popular music remain strong. 
r
icky Martin 
did include a dominant Spanish phrase in his blockbuster pop hit “Livin’ La Vida Loca” (1999). And reggaeton has managed to achieve some measure of mainstream acceptance, with albums by artists such as 
d
addy Yankee and 
d
on 
o
mar peaking in the pop Top Forty. 
This status has thus far eluded individual songs sung in Spanish. With the increasing  
diversity of the 
u
.S. population, this situation is bound to change, but the 
r
ecording 
 
Academy’s 2011 decision to eliminate several Latin music categories from the Grammy Awards suggests that the 
u
.S. music industry is far from assigning Spanish-language 
 
music equal standing. In T roduc TI on  13The Long, Hard Climb: Gender Discrimination
The barriers that women face in the music industry are equally formidable. Historically, the 
images of women in popular songs—from angel and baby to earth mother and sex goddess to bitch and “ho”—have been limiting or belittling, if not flat-out offensive and degrading. Women 
performers have often been pressured by the industry to assume personas based on these ste-
reotypes. The existence of a double standard regarding intimacy and sexual practices in the 
u
nited States has made the social dynamics of life on the road more complicated and alienating 
for women than for men. As if these difficulties were not enough, women have had to over-
come the obstacles that stand between them and control over the creative processes. Technical processes such as record producing, engineering, mixing, and mastering are still overwhelm-ingly male dominated, as are areas of music performance that involve significant technological knowledge, whether playing electric guitar or working with digital tools as a modern 
d
J.
While some women were able to achieve a certain status as vocalists in the decades pre-
ceding the emergence of rock ‘n’ roll, no woman ever achieved the status of an Al Jolson, Bing 
c
rosby, or Frank Sinatra, and women almost never became successful as instrumentalists. 
Whatever status could be achieved disappeared rapidly with the advent of rock ‘n’ roll. Indeed, 
rock ‘n’ roll actually reduced the presence of women in popular music. In the early 1960s, the women who were marketed as folk madonnas were channeled toward softer vocal styles, which were usually linked only to acoustic instruments. This trend continued among the female singer/songwriters of the 1970s, Bonnie 
r
aitt being a notable exception. Even harder-rocking 
women in the 1960s—from the 
c
rystals and the 
r
onettes to Grace Slick, Janis Joplin, and 
Aretha Franklin—were promoted as vocalists who never touched electric instruments. While there were certain breakthroughs for women when the punk movement rewrote the rules of access, these gains were offset to some degree in the next decade by the misogyny displayed in 
rap and heavy metal.
By the late 1980s, women were fairly well represented in most styles (with the exception 
of heavy metal), and in the early 1990s, they had finally begun to compete on a roughly equal 
footing with men for lucrative recording contracts. As they have achieved greater acceptance in the popular market, however, they have had to confront an industry infrastructure that is fully owned and operated by men whose ideas about career development frequently push them to conform to male stereotypes of how female performers should act and sound. In other words, like African Americans and other people of color, women performers must confront norms and social practices that limit their development and chances for success. For female artists of color the pressures and conflicts that derive from these circumstances are only compounded.
d
espite these structural inequalities, rock and other forms of popular music since the 
1950s have allowed considerable room for challenging conventions of gender and sexual be-havior in the public sphere, especially for male performers. Elvis Presley’s exaggerated swag-ger and brooding features carried more than a subtle hint of androgyny, the perception of which may have contributed as much to the sensation he stirred as his perceived transgression of racial boundaries. Mick Jagger presented a comparable mix of male bravado and feminine flirtatiousness in the following decade, and prefigured the more full-fledged flowering of rock 14 rock I n’ ou Tand roll androgyny in the 1970s under the banner of “glam” or “glitter” rock.41 disco was 
founded as an underground phenomenon catering to a predominantly gay male audience prior 
to its mainstream incorporation, and dance music has remained a sphere in which nonhetero-
sexist sexualities have been given more room to flourish than has been typical in other styles.42 
Female dance music artists such as Madonna and Lady Gaga have also shown a greater capacity 
to control and revise the terms through which they are represented than their rock counter-
parts, and so have presented a strong if still contradictory model of empowerment.
Regulating Popular Music
Because popular music always interacts with its social environment, it often serves as a 
lightning rod for the political controversies that invariably accompany change. The Tin Pan  
Alley pop that dominated the first half of the twentieth century, for example, was marked by 
a studied inoffensiveness that, in retrospect, makes it difficult to imagine that anything about 
it, except its saccharine sweetness, could upset anyone. Still, the moral guardians of the early twentieth century felt that even Tin Pan Alley pop was too depraved for mainstream consump-tion, let alone the jazz that developed concurrently. As early as 1913, the well-known violinist Maud Powell told the 
n
ational Federation of Music 
c
lubs that the music of the 
u
nited States 
had been
thrown into disrepute through the unspeakably depraved modern popular song, . . . which consists 
of brazenly suggestive words to a catchy rag-time accompaniment.
Its effect on young folk is shocking. The vicious song is allowed in the home by parents, who, 
no doubt, have not troubled themselves to look at the words. As a result the suggestive meanings are allowed to play upon immature minds at the dangerous age. It is from the popular song that 
the popular suggestive dance sprang. Together and apart they are a menace to the social fabric.
43
Powell went on to state that she was “heartily in favor of a board of censorship for the popular 
song.”44 Imagine the horror she would have felt had she been exposed to the rumblings of blues 
or country music, which surveyed more personal themes in a far more vernacular tone.
Throughout the second half of the twentieth century, popular music was connected quite 
explicitly with social change and political controversy. As millions of adults left the intensity 
of urban life in the 1950s for the new and expansive sprawl called suburbia, rock ‘n’ roll pulled their offspring back to the sounds of the city. While postwar youth may have found the new sound exciting and engaging, adults found it threatening and levied criticisms far more damn-ing than Powell’s condemnations of Tin Pan Alley pop. Indeed in the late 1950s, a conservative reaction against rock ‘n’ roll sought to turn back the musical clock by imposing rigid guide-lines on radio.
A variation of this same social drama was played out in the 1980s and 1990s, when the 
custodians of culture became convinced that rap and heavy metal had gone too far and tried 
to regulate popular music through tactics ranging from a demand for warning labels on sound recordings to outright censorship. A more aggressive suppression of popular music was under-taken after the attacks on the World Trade 
c
enter and the Pentagon on September 11, 2001,  In T roduc TI on  15in the name of national security. d uring this same time frame, a different kind of struggle over 
access to popular music took shape in response to its growing availability through noncom-
mercial channels over the Internet. Whereas previous conflicts concerned the potential threat 
posed to young listeners by “offensive” content, now listeners young and old were accused of 
diverting profit from its rightful bearers and made the target of lawsuits sponsored by the 
r
e-
cord Industry Association of America to check the flow of “free” music. Given the pronounce-ments of a whole range of public figures and elected officials on these topics, a compelling case can be made that popular culture—particularly popular music—has become the ideological battlefield on which struggles for power, values, and identity take place. 
c
learly, then, popu-
lar music is potent cultural capital—aesthetically, economically, and politically. 
u
nraveling and 
analyzing the complexities of its often contradictory social functions is the subject matter of Rockin’ Out.16 
1 Constructing Tin Pan 
Alley: From Minstrelsy to Mass Culture
The institution of slavery has been such a defining   
feature of U.S. history that it is hardly surprising to find the roots of our 
popular music embedded in this tortured legacy. Indeed, the first indig-
enous U.S. popular music to capture the imagination of a broad public, 
at home and abroad, was blackface minstrelsy, a cultural form involving 
mostly Northern whites in blackened faces, parodying their perceptions of African American culture. Minstrelsy appeared at a time when songwriting and music publishing were dispersed throughout the country and sound recording had not yet been invented. During this period, there was an important geographical pattern in the way music circulated. Concert music by foreign composers intended for elite U.S. audiences generally played in New York City first 
and then in other major cities. In contrast, domestic popular mu-sic, 
 
including minstrel music, was first tested in smaller towns, then 
went to larger urban areas, and entered New York only after suc-
cess elsewhere. Songwriting and music publishing were similarly dispersed. New York did not become the nerve center for indige-
nous popular music until later in the nineteenth century, when the previously scattered con-glomeration of songwriters and publishers began to converge on the Broadway and 28th Street section of the city, in an area that came to be called Tin Pan Alley after the tinny output of its upright pianos. These talented songwriters and indefatigable publishers, who would go on to dominate mainstream popular music until the post–World War II period, were attuned to every nuance of cultural variation the United States had to offer. And during their reign, they would encounter all of the new technologies—sound recording, talking films, radio, and televi-sion—that would come to define mass culture.
LEARN MORE
Learning objectives 
on MySearchLabThe institution of slavery has been 
such a defining 
 
feature of U.S. history 
that it is hardly surprising to find the 
roots of our popular music embedded in 
this tortured legacy. C o NST r UCTIN g TIN  PAN  A lle Y 17Minstrelsy: The Making of Mainstream U.S. Culture
When blackface minstrelsy first appeared in the early nineteenth century, U.S. popular music ex-
isted in the shadow of 
e
uropean opera, which enjoyed considerable popular support. As the class 
hierarchy in the United States became more clearly delineated, opera came to be increasingly iden-
tified with the cultural elite, while those lower down the socioeconomic scale gravitated more to-
ward ethnic Scottish and Irish melodies, Italian bel canto, and the soon to be dominant homegrown songs of minstrelsy. As the complexity of U.S. society increased, it led to greater segregation of audiences—not only by class, but by race and gender as well. Accordingly, the initial audiences for blackface minstrelsy tended to be white, working class, and male. Minstrelsy established a vexing and recurring pattern of uneven musi-cal exchange in which white interpretations and appropriations of Afri-can American culture would receive disproportionate credit in defining mainstream popular culture, while black performers would struggle for 
visibility even when black music or culture was being portrayed.
At a superficial level, minstrelsy’s assertive rhythms and vigor-
ous dancing, coupled with singing and dialogue that combined bit -
ing wit and social commentary, were not inconsistent with the cultural patterns of enslaved Africans. Still, with relatively little understanding of or sensitivity toward African American culture, the curiosity and enthusiasm with which these white entertainers approached it were matched only by the distortions and virulence with which they reproduced it. In minstrelsy, we find both the centrality of African American contributions to our popular culture and the un-easy blending of fascination and fear, delight and disdain, respect and rebuke—indeed, love and hate—that typified the posture of most U.S. whites toward African Americans and their culture.
Blackface masking did not begin with minstrelsy, nor was it inevitably race related. The 
practice dates back at least to the Middle Ages in Britain and 
e
urope in certain ritual 
 
dramas 
such as morris dancing and mummer’s plays. Callithumpian bands—agitators who had been known to disrupt parliamentary elections in Britain and Ireland—also blackened their faces at times. In the United States, they roamed the streets of New York, Philadelphia, and 
 
Boston 
from the 1820s onward and were described in the Philadelphia Sunday Dispatch as “men who render the night hideous by their yelling, drum-beatings, and horn-toutings, and the day dis-gusting by their outrageous masking and foul disguises.”
1 In these so-called “rituals of inver-
sion,” masking was used as a way of hiding one’s identity and symbolically inverting social 
roles to disrupt the normal flow and power relations of daily life. The available evidence in-
dicates that, in most instances, these actors were not attempting to represent persons of 
 
African descent. There were also rituals of West African origin involving parading, reveling, 
and grotesque masking that worked their way to the “New World” during the slave trade. In the Jonkonnu festivals that traveled from West Africa to the Caribbean and up the 
e
astern 
 
seaboard of the United States, actors of African descent masked their faces with ash to perform similar role inversions.
In the slaveholding United States, of course, associations between blackface and race were 
more likely intentional and, in any case, inevitable. The parodic humor of minstrel songs was often hostile and degrading; minstrel lyrics were invariably written and sung in a caricatured EXPLORE MORE
Timeline on 
MySearchLab
white interpretations and appro-
priations of African American culture 
would receive disproportionate credit 
in defining mainstream popular culture, 
while black performers would struggle for visibility even when black music or culture was being portrayed.18 ro C k IN ’ o UTblack dialect and routinely referred to African Americans as “niggers,” “darkies,” and “coons.” 
Still, the immediate acceptance of minstrelsy suggests that it might not have been received as a totally new cultural form, but rather a form that was already familiar, albeit one that was laden 
with new meaning in its new context. It is also worth noting that in minstrelsy, a performance 
was no longer a time-bound, seasonal ritual, but now a defining popular art.
Thomas Dartmouth 
r
ice is most often credited with institutionalizing the practice of 
racial impersonation through blackface performance. As cultural lore would have it, 
r
ice, an 
aspiring young actor, took the characteristic clothing and bodily movements that became asso-ciated with his character “Jim Crow” from an impoverished black man named “Cuff ” whom he encountered one evening before a scheduled performance. Sometimes when the story was told, the location was Cincinnati; in other versions it was Pittsburgh. The shifting location is an in -
dication that the tale is as much myth as history, but the encounter establishes that minstrelsy 
involved a symbolic exchange between white and black men, in which white performers appro-priated qualities of blackness for their own economic and cultural gain, and for the amusement of white onlookers.
2
The character that r ice developed into “Jim Crow” typified the contradictions that ran 
through minstrelsy: a slow-witted, lackadaisical plantation slave with great physical charisma and 
hidden wit. 
e
arly printed versions of the song 
r
ice sang as part of his impersonation indicate that 
even political commentary was fair game. 
o
ne particularly extensive version, some forty-four 
verses in duration, found “Jim Crow” announcing, “I’m for freedom/An’ for Union altogether/ 
Aldough I’m a black man/De white is call’d my broder.”3 Challenging accepted racial codes at 
times, 
r
ice “jumped Jim Crow” in Cincinnati, 
l
ouisville, Philadelphia, Washington, and 
 
Baltimore 
for enthusiastic crowds before appearing in New York in 1832. He then parlayed his fame into a 
well-received yearlong tour of the British Isles in 1836, thereby intro-
ducing foreign audiences to the first form of popular music that was considered distinctly “ American.” Beyond the life of 
r
ice’s career, the 
Jim Crow stereotype proved persistent, becoming the unofficial name given to the legislation that was used to deprive African 
 
Americans of 
their civil rights in the latter half of the nineteenth century.
As early minstrelsy developed, it was dominated by two equally demeaning characters. 
Jim Crow evolved into the Sambo, an archetype of the happy, obedient plantation slave. At the other end of the spectrum was the urban dandy—a northern city slicker who went variously 
by names like Zip Coon, Jim Dandy, and others; he was fashionably dressed, streetwise, and at times given to violence. The song “Zip Coon” was performed in the early 1830s by 
g
eorge 
Washington Dixon and others, and it lives on as “Turkey in the Straw,” a perennial favorite 
among country fiddlers. At this time, minstrel performance was a solo art that might take place in a theater, the street, or someone’s kitchen, and minstrel performances in public venues were sandwiched between all other kinds of entertainment, from legitimate theater to circus acts.
It wasn’t until the appearance of Dan 
e
mmett and the Virginia Minstrels in the early 
1840s that the genre began to take shape as a self-contained ensemble performance of its own. 
l
ike 
r
ice, the Virginia Minstrels followed U.S. success with a tour of the British Isles, where 
the group disbanded. After his return to the United States, 
e
mmett composed one of the most 
popular and enduring “plantation songs” of minstrelsy, “Dixie 
l
and,” about a freed slave who Beyond the life of Rice’s career, the 
Jim Crow stereotype proved persistent, 
becoming the unofficial name given to 
the legislation that was used to deprive 
African Americans of their civil rights in the latter half of the nineteenth century. C o NST r UCTIN g TIN  PAN  A lle Y 19longs for the simple pleasures of plantation life.  During 
the Civil War, “Dixie” became the unofficial anthem  
of the Confederacy, and the word became a synonym 
for the southern United States. Meanwhile, minstrel 
troupes proliferated under the influence of the Virginia 
 Minstrels. In addition to groups named after their found-
ers or places of origin, there were attempts to capture the supposed ethnic origins of the genre with names like the African Melodists, the Congo Minstrels, and the 
 e
thiopian Band. The popular Christy Minstrels billed 
themselves as the “original and far famed band of 
e
thio-
pian Minstrels.”4 In minstrel music, however, the influ-
ence of spirited 
e
nglish or Irish folk music was as strong as the African or African American 
styles it sought to mimic.
In its standard form, the minstrel show included ensemble singing, dances and marches, 
stump speeches, and comic sketches, “strung together with witticisms, ripostes, shouts, 
puns, and other attempts at Negro impersonation.”5 Instrumentation consisted of strings 
such as 
 
violin and banjo for melody, and a rhythm section comprising the two “endmen”—  
Mr. Tambo (on tambourine) and Mr. Bones (who played bones or castanets). The banjo, an 
instrument 
 
derived from West African string instruments and strongly associated with black 
slave 
 
musicians in the North American and Caribbean colonies from the early eighteenth cen-
tury forward, carried great symbolic weight as a primary icon of minstrel music’s purported 
 
“ African” tendencies, even as its use among white minstrel performers made it a more fully 
Americanized medium.6 As minstrelsy matured, the show was divided into three parts: the 
opening segment was devoted to the Northern dandy, while the closing centered on a skit in-
volving the 
 
Southern plantation slave. A later middle section, the olio, included mock lectures 
and speeches. 
o
ver time, the endmen gained in importance, as the addition of a third character, 
Mr. Interlocutor, provided a target for their witty repartee.
Although racial oppression and nostalgic views of slavery persisted after 
e
mancipation, 
minstrelsy generally moved toward a more sympathetic treatment of African Americans. No 
one was more identified with this trajectory than Stephen Foster, perhaps the best-known U.S. 
songwriter of the nineteenth century. Foster humanized minstrelsy, but without directly chal -
lenging black stereotypes or the institution of slavery. 
o
ne of his first and most popular min-
strel songs, “
o
h! Susanna” (1848), portrayed African Americans as good natured but simple 
minded, and it is still taught in primary schools as an innocent novelty song. The term nigger  
was liberally sprinkled throughout “
o
ld Uncle Ned,” written the same year, but by the song’s 
end the slave master genuinely mourns Ned’s passing. In subsequent compositions—“
o
ld In “Jim Crow,” Thomas Dartmouth Rice created a character 
that was a grotesque impression of an enslaved African American.
20 ro C k IN ’ o UTFolks at Home,” “My o ld k entucky Home”—Foster began to downplay the exaggerated black 
dialect and achieved “a lament for lost home, friends, and youth, cutting across racial and eth-
nic lines. . . .”7 But even as late as 1860, “ o ld Black Joe,” which borrowed respectfully from the 
“Negro spiritual” tradition, could be criticized for its racial condescension. Foster’s songs were 
sufficiently popular—some selling in the range of 100,000 copies—that he became the first 
U.S. composer to eke out a living from songwriting alone. Still, never having received his due 
from publishers, he died with thirty-eight cents in his pocket.8
By the postbellum period, minstrelsy had become so overpowering that even African 
Americans composed minstrel songs and joined minstrel troupes, complete with blackface 
performances. Minstrel historian 
r
obert Toll counted only six troupes of black minstrel per-
formers prior to the end of the Civil War, but from 1865 forward such organizations prolifer-
ated dramatically, such that by 1890 nearly one hundred could be identified.9 Most prominent 
among these early ensembles was Brooker and Clayton’s 
g
eorgia Minstrels, formed in 1865, 
whose success made the name “
g
eorgia Minstrels” a general designation for any black min-
strel troupe. Among the African American performers who gained notoriety after the Civil War were Billy 
k
ersands, widely reputed for his comedic prowess, and James Bland, who 
dropped out of Howard University to pursue a career in minstrelsy. Bland became the first commercially successful African American songwriter. His plantation song, “Carry Me Back to 
o
ld Virginny,” became the Virginia state song in 1940, even though many found the well-worn 
trope of the nostalgic ex-slave and the language of “massa” and “darkey” to be offensive. In the end, Bland’s music was no more indebted to black culture than that of his white minstrel coun-terparts. At that moment, minstrelsy offered black entertainers the most lucrative opportunity available to them; they may have felt that they had no better alternative than to imitate the 
white performers imitating them.
Sheet Music, Sound Recording, and the Sounds of Music
Between the Civil War and the turn of the twentieth century, minstrelsy was gradually sup-
planted by vaudeville, a variety show format that marked the beginning of popular entertainment as big business. From its modest beginnings at Tony Pastor’s 
o
pera House in New York City’s 
Bowery, vaudeville had evolved by the turn of the century into a national network of hundreds 
of venues dominated by the 
k
eith-Albee theater chain in the 
e
ast and the 
o
rpheum circuit in the 
West. Because popular songs were a staple of vaudeville, Tin Pan Alley publishers were regular visitors to the gala shows produced in New York by the likes of F . F . Proctor, 
o
scar 
 
Hammerstein, 
and Flo Ziegfeld. “They made fifty or sixty visits a week,” 
r
ussell Sanjek has noted, “to boost 
their newest publications.”10 Their “persuasion tactics,” according to Charles Hamm, might in-
clude “out-and-out payment by the publisher—a flat fee, or in some cases a promise of a percent-
age of profits from sales of sheet music.”11 The practice of “paying 
for play”—legal at the time and considered a form of intelligent mar-
keting rather than a shady business practice—eventually came to be 
known as “payola.” For the publishers, such investments in vaudeville 
stars were often returned many times in sheet music sales.The practice of “paying for play”—legal 
at the time and considered a form of in-
telligent marketing rather than a shady 
business practice—eventually came to be 
known as “payola.” C o NST r UCTIN g TIN  PAN  A lle Y 21Because middle-class home entertainment at this time centered on the piano, sheet mu-
sic was the main vehicle for the mass dissemination of music, and publishing firms were the 
core institutions of the music business. In 1880, some 45,000 pianos were manufactured in the 
United States.12 over the next thirty years, annual production increased eightfold. Sheet music 
retailed for thirty to forty cents a copy; for the major publishers, sales were known to reach 
millions of copies. Charles 
k
. Harris’s “ After the Ball,” written and published in 1892, “quickly 
reached sales of $25,000 a week” and “sold more than 2,000,000 copies in only several years, 
eventually achieving a sale of some five million.”13 With potential sales such as these, it is not 
surprising that music publishers were not particularly interested in the cylinder phonograph 
that Thomas 
e
dison had invented in 1877. They were far too preoccupied with the sale of sheet 
music—their primary source of revenue—to bother about records.
When 
e
dison first conceived of sound recording, he felt that its greatest potential lay in 
reproducing speech and hailed his invention as a “talking machine.” Still, he decided to introduce 
it to the public by exploiting its musical properties. In countless demonstrations in lecture halls and vaudeville houses, scores of local vocalists, whistlers, and instrumentalists were invited to try their hand at recording. Although brass reproduced reasonably well, the poor sound quality of early cylinders severely hampered their commercial value. 
o
nce awed by its potential, 
e
dison mo-
mentarily dismissed his phonograph as “a mere toy, which has no commercial value,” and turned 
his attention to the invention of the electric light before once again returning to recording.14
The next steps in recording were undertaken by Charles Sumner Tainter and Chichester 
Bell in the Volta 
l
aboratory of 
e
dison’s fellow inventor, Alexander 
g
raham Bell. Five years 
of research yielded the graphophone, whose floating stylus and wax-coated cardboard cylinder 
produced better sound quality than 
e
dison’s machine. In the late 1880s, the 
e
dison patents 
and the national sales rights to the graphophone were consolidated into the North American 
Phonograph Company, which originally intended to sell the recording devices as dictating ma-chines. Their District of Columbia franchise—the Columbia Phonograph Company—would go on to become the oldest trademark in the recording business. Because at this time recording was a mechanical process rather than an electromechanical one, it was called acoustic recording  
and it would soon be devoted almost exclusively to music.
In 1889, 
l
ouis 
g
lass pointed the way to the future of the phonograph. 
g
lass had equipped 
some of his dictating machines with a patented, coin-activated mechanism and four sets of 
stethoscopic listening tubes, and he placed them in the Palais 
r
oyal Saloon in San Francisco. 
For a nickel per listener per play, patrons could avail themselves of the sounds of a prerecorded “entertainment” cylinder. These “nickel-in-the-slot” machines were so successful that, within a year, 
g
lass had placed machines in eighteen other locations, some of which began bringing 
in as much as $1,200 annually. The enterprise won for 
g
lass the title of Father of the Juke 
Box. Pay phonographs proved to be very popular in a wide range of venues, from amusement parks and drug stores to saloons and train stations. However, because phonographs retailed for almost $150 and cylinders could not be mass produced economically, a home entertainment market for prerecorded music was not yet feasible.
Among the early cylinders that caught on were those featuring brass bands, instrumental 
solos, comic Irish tales, and so-called coon songs, novelty songs exploiting negative stereotypes 
of African Americans in caricatured black dialect. As the number of locations for coin-operated HEAR MORE
“Happy Birthday 
Phonograph” on MySearchLab22 ro C k IN ’ o UTphonographs increased, so did the demand for prerecorded cylinders. However, three factors 
stood in the way of a natural alliance between Tin Pan Alley and the new cylinder-recording companies: because of their limited sound quality, cylinders tended to favor spoken-word and in-
strumental selections; publishers did not receive royalties from the sale or use of recorded music; 
and the demand for prerecorded cylinders could not compete with the demand for sheet music. Thus, the companies manufacturing prerecorded cylinders grew independently of Tin Pan Alley.
The Columbia Phonograph Company quickly distinguished itself as the leading producer 
of quality entertainment cylinders. Among the company’s earliest popular cylinders were marches, waltzes, and popular Irish favorites such as “
l
ittle Annie 
r
ooney” and “Down Went 
Mc
g
inty,” as well as about 100 recordings of the U.S. Marine Band. Meanwhile, new develop-
ments in recording technology had rekindled 
e
dison’s interest in the field. During the early 
1890s, improvements in sound reproduction came quickly, and within a few years, both Co-
lumbia and 
e
dison had introduced affordable phonographs, leading to the creation of a home 
entertainment market for prerecorded cylinders.
By 1896, Columbia’s catalogue of prerecorded cylinders listed thousands of titles. 
e
dison 
boasted 
g
eorge Washington Johnson—if not the first, then certainly the most successful black 
recording artist at the time—who achieved fame and fortune with two hits, “The Whistling Coon” and “The 
l
aughing Song.” Competition between the two companies was fierce; in fact, 
they spent so much time fighting each other that they paid little attention to the development of disc recording, an innovation that eventually consigned cylinders to the dustbin of history.
e
mile Berliner, a 
g
erman immigrant, developed the flat recording disc that became the 
industry standard. In 1888, Berliner unveiled his gramophone and, at its first demonstration, prophesied the ability to make an unlimited number of copies from a single master, the use 
of discs for home entertainment on a mass scale, and a system of royalty payments to artists 
derived from the sale of discs. In short, Berliner was the first to envision the contours of the modern music industry.
Berliner delivered on his first prophecy when he made negative discs, called “stampers,” 
which were then pressed into ebonite rubber biscuits to produce an exact duplicate, or “record,” of the master. A later improvement replaced the rubber discs with shellac-based, 78 revolu-tions per minute (rpm) pressings, which became the industry standard until the late 1940s. To realize his second prophecy, the use of discs for home entertainment, Berliner recruited Fred 
 g
aisberg. 
g
aisberg had been coordinating talent and recording at Columbia, and Berliner 
made him, in effect, the first artist and repertoire (a&r) man in the infant industry.
Berliner hired 
e
ldridge 
r
. Johnson to manufacture the gramophones. Adding improve-
ments of his own, Johnson soon began turning out machines by the hundreds. In 1901, the two men consolidated their interests into the Victor Talking Machine Company, with Johnson as the senior partner. They adopted as the company logo the famous 
l
ittle Nipper (the pup 
listening attentively to his master’s voice emanating from a record horn). Shortly afterward, the major recording companies—
e
dison, Columbia, and Victor—pooled their patents and set 
about the business of making better records and machines.15 From this point until the advent of 
commercial radio following World War I, acoustic recording enjoyed its golden era.
Because exclusive recording contracts were not yet the industry standard, artists were 
not tied to a single company. 
g
aisberg was soon recording Columbia’s top artists for Victor  C o NST r UCTIN g TIN  PAN  A lle Y 23and, through its British partner, the g ramophone Company, those in every music capital in 
e
urope. The British 
g
ramophone catalogue contained songs and arias in every 
e
uropean lan-
guage and many 
o
riental languages that were considered culturally superior to most record-
ings. Victor imported these higher-priced 
r
ed Seal classical recordings for sale in the United 
States and then began a domestic 
r
ed 
l
abel series of its own, featuring stars of New York’s 
Metropolitan 
o
pera.16 Italian tenor e nrico Caruso became the jewel in the crown of the new 
series when he signed an exclusive Victor contract offering him the unprecedented provision of a royalty on records sold—thereby fulfilling the last of Berliner’s 1888 prophecies. Victor’s 
r
ed 
l
abel series was clearly intended for the wealthy “carriage trade.” Columbia also featured a 
grand opera series of its own. However, by 1910, as Ian Whitcomb points out in his inimitable 
style, “It was quite clear to the record companies that the classics only brought in prestige and that the steady income was to be made from sales to the ‘Cracker-Barrel Trade,’ to the ‘
g
ood 
o
ld Coon Song–Sousa–Monologue–Sentimental Ballad–Bunch.’
 
”17
If the choice of recorded material was an indicator of class differences, the choice of for -
mat revealed a rural–urban split. “By the middle of the first decade of the twentieth century,” 
writes C. A. Schicke, “the disc had distinctly succeeded in capturing the buying power of the 
upper and middle classes and the urban population. The cylinder’s stronghold—and mostly 
e
dison cylinders at that—was the poorer, rural market.”18 In both instances, however, the se-
lection of recording artists was made with only the white population in mind. With the excep-
tion of 
g
eorge W . Johnson and the great black vaudevillian Bert Williams, even so-called coon 
songs, a staple of the recording companies from the beginning, were almost invariably sung by 
whites. 
r
ecordings by African Americans were relatively rare prior to World War I, although 
some such as the Fisk Jubilee Singers made important contributions to the preservation of black spirituals, while James 
r
eese 
e
urope’s Society 
o
rchestra laid the groundwork for the 
subsequent flourishing of instrumental jazz (more on which below).19
While the golden age of acoustic recording drew on and preserved a broad range of musi-
cal styles, it also established some of the most troubling aspects of the contemporary music in-
dustry, the first being the fragmentation of the audience not only along class lines but also along 
geographic and, of course, racial lines. It was also claimed that the existing technology favored 
lower (i.e., male) voices. Ada Jones was not simply the “First 
l
ady of Phonograph 
r
ecords,” she 
was one of the only ladies of phonograph records. In addition, the technological advances of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries introduced what later critics of mass culture would see as the historical schism that marked the transition from active music making to passive mu-sic consumption. In the popular image of a family gathered around the living-room piano, music is “consumed” through the active participation of all concerned. With the invention of record -
ing, it was no longer necessary to have any musical ability whatsoever to re-create the sound of music, a point that proponents of the phonograph used to argue 
for the device’s potential to foster music education by bringing “great music” to listeners who might otherwise not get to enjoy it.
20 In play-
ing to the earlier image of “family entertainment,” the Tin Pan Alley 
publishing houses were naturally at odds with the record companies.
In its formative stages, then, the “music industry” could in no 
way be considered synonymous with the “recording industry,” as In its formative stages, then, the 
 
“music industry” could in no way 
be considered synonymous with the 
 
“recording industry,” as it has been 
more recently; it was, if anything, song-writing and music publishing.24 ro C k IN ’ o UTit has been more recently; it was, if anything, songwriting and music publishing. o f course, 
the writers of Tin Pan Alley, from Charles 
k
. Harris, Paul Dresser, and Harry Von Tilzer 
to 
g
eorge 
g
ershwin, Jerome 
k
ern, and Irving Berlin, took notice of records and eventually 
pushed record companies to record their songs, but for a variety of reasons—practical, techni-
cal, legal, aesthetic, and economic—Tin Pan Alley never embraced records. Thus, while Tin Pan Alley and the recording industry intersected at many points and with increasing frequency over the years, they effectively developed as separate industries. 
e
ven as records promised to 
become the dominant medium for the mass reproduction of music, Tin Pan Alley continued to identify itself primarily with the “literate” Broadway–Hollywood axis of popular music—a fact that helps account for the disjuncture that marked the emergence of rock ‘n’ roll, a product that was identified with record labels. Just as record companies would come to replace publishing houses as the center of the music industry, rock ‘n’ roll would push aside Tin Pan Alley pop as 
the dominant style of popular music. But not until midcentury.
Tin Pan Alley Creates Musical Tradition
Tin Pan Alley centralized the U.S. popular music business during the ascendancy of vaude-
ville, at a time when 
e
uropean opera was still the hallmark of (upper-class) taste. Although 
songwriters in the United States often took their cues from 
e
uropean high culture, they soon 
came to realize that the key to profitability lay in catering to popular tastes. Unlike older, more 
traditional music publishing houses that issued a broad range of 
material, the song factories of Tin Pan Alley produced only popu-lar songs; in so doing, “Tin Pan Alley songwriters soon reached a stylistic plateau, a much more homogeneous style than had ever be-fore been the case in the history of song in America.”
21 Indeed, Tin 
Pan Alley availed itself of a much narrower range of material than 
did the record companies and parlayed the undertaking into an overwhelming—and distinctly 
“ American”—success. “Tin Pan Alley did not draw on traditional music,” musicologist Charles 
Hamm has said, “it created traditional music.”22
Typical of early Tin Pan Alley fare were graceful waltzes and spirited marches. Familiar 
waltzes included Harry Von Tilzer’s “Bird in a 
g
ilded Cage” (1900), “In the 
g
ood 
o
ld Sum-
mer Time” by 
g
eorge 
e
vans (1902), and 
e
gbert Van Alstyne’s “In the Shade of the 
o
ld Apple 
Tree” (1905). All sold millions. The marches of John Philip Sousa and the Marine Band were 
perhaps best echoed in popular song by the multitalented 
g
eorge M. Cohan. From “
g
ive My 
r
egards to Broadway” in 1904 to his World War I rally tune, “
o
ver There,” in 1917, Cohan’s 
up-tempo, lightly syncopated numbers won him enduring popularity.
Ironically, for all its definitive American-ness, Jewish Americans dominated Tin Pan 
 
Alley, 
at a time when Jewish immigrants were considered racially different by many. If one had to choose a single artist who epitomized the Tin Pan Alley ethos, it would be Irving 
 
Berlin, about 
whom the Literary Digest, after praising his work, remarked with surprise: “ And 
 
Berlin belongs 
to the Jewish race.”23 Berlin (Israel Baline) was four years old in 1892 when he and his fam-
ily came to the United States after escaping 
r
ussian pogroms. 
l
ike many Jewish immigrants Unlike older, more traditional music 
publishing houses that issued a broad 
range of material, the song factories 
of Tin Pan Alley produced only popular 
songs. C o NST r UCTIN g TIN  PAN  A lle Y 25of the period, they settled in New York’s l ower e ast 
Side, where they lived in abject poverty: “ At fourteen, he 
was a singing waiter in the honky tonks of Chinatown 
and the Bowery, absorbing the rich sounds and rhythms 
of the musical melting pot.”24 Two years later, Berlin 
landed his first Tin Pan Alley job. There, he wrote classics such as “ A Pretty 
g
irl Is 
l
ike a 
Melody” (1919), “Puttin’ on the 
r
itz” (1929), “
e
aster Parade” (1933), and “
g
od Bless America” 
(1939), which captured the hearts and minds of generations and made Berlin a household name. 
 
Until he was unseated by Paul 
 
McCartney, 
 
Berlin was easily the most successful songwriter 
in history. “The range of his songs, in content and mood, if not in form,” Hamm has said, “is enormous. . . . Some take on a bit of the flavor of ragtime, of the blues, of country-western, 
l
atin-American, or jazz.”25 His appropriations of ragtime and jazz in particular speak volumes 
about the ways in which 
e
uropean “ethnic” Americans could find their way into the American 
mainstream by drawing on African American music and culture, using black racial difference to 
lay claim to a whiteness otherwise denied them.26
Incorporating Ragtime, Blues, and Jazz
The rise of Tin Pan Alley paralleled the emergence of ragtime, and the connections between 
the two reveal the inequitable pattern of cultural borrowing and economic reward between black and white artists that has characterized much of the history of popular music in this 
country. This pattern is central to understanding the advent of rock ‘n’ roll. 
r
agtime began as 
a syncopated, African American music with structural ties to 
e
uropean marches. It employed, 
in the words of 
g
unther Schuller, “the polymetric . . . approach of the African native forced into 
the simple 2/4 pattern of 
e
uropean marches.”27 It began in conjunction with a dance called the 
cakewalk, which involved blacks imitating the grand entrance of whites to society balls. In the 
hands of its most famous practitioner, the African American pianist and composer Scott Joplin, 
ragtime was a self-conscious art form, a composed music. Joplin himself, Whitcomb has noted, 
“presented the New Negro,”28 a polished composer well versed in musical notation. His “Maple 
l
eaf 
r
ag” (1899) remains one of the best-known ragtime compositions.29
For Tin Pan Alley, ragtime was a craze to be incorporated into popular song. As such, it 
is often difficult to separate ragtime songs from other Tin Pan Alley pop. In their affinity for 
slow march tempos, for example, ragtime songs tended to resemble 
g
eorge M. Cohan’s most 
successful musical theater numbers. It can also be argued that there is a historical and stylistic 
continuity from “coon” songs to the ragtime songs of Tin Pan Alley, although the latter were 
clearly less offensive. Irving Berlin turned out dozens of ragtime songs, including “Play Some Irving Berlin lived to be 101 years old and became one 
of the most prolific songwriters of the twentieth century. 
 Because he could play piano in only one key, he compen-
sated by using a piano with a moveable keyboard that 
could transpose into other keys.
26 ro C k IN ’ o UT
Listening Guide 1As was the case with her stature (over 6 feet), weight (over 200 pounds), 
appetite for food and sex, and enormous voice, Bessie Smith’s talent was 
so great that anything she sang—from Tin Pan Alley to Mississippi Delta 
songs—became the blues. She is one of the most influential singers of 
the early twentieth century, but like many of her musical contemporaries, her career could not recover from the economic downturn of the Great Depression. In 1937, she was severely injured in a car accident on Missis-
sippi’s notorious Highway 61 and died within hours.
Musical Style Notes
“Alexander’s Ragtime Band” (1911) was a relic of an earlier age, when Tin Pan Alley songwriters explored the rhythmic 
possibilities and the pop hooks implicit in ragtime. These “ragtime songs” did not employ the multistrain form of true ragtime, but the incorporation of its syncopation (accents on the off-beats) and pentatonic (five-note) melodies made for 
enormously effective pop music.
Like many Irving Berlin standards, “Alexander’s Ragtime Band” was constructed of multiple verses with a repeat-
ing chorus. On this recording, however, we hear only the first verse, which is then followed by three repetitions of the 
chorus: vocal, instrumental, and then vocal again. Smith has also changed some of the words, replacing some of Berlin’s 
1911 imitation “black dialect” with more natural-sounding lyrics: “Oh, honey” instead of “Oh, ma honey,” and “the best-
est band in the land” rather than “the best-est band what am in the land.”
Bessie Smith sings in a classic blues style, but many of her instrumentalists on this track are jazz players (Joe 
Smith, trumpet; Coleman Hawkins, clarinet; Jimmy Harrison, trombone; Fletcher Henderson, piano; Charlie Dixon, banjo). This instrumentation was typical of early recorded blues, much of which drew upon urban styles current among black vaudeville performers, and was an indication that the boundary between recorded blues and jazz was rather slippery through much of the 1920s. The ensemble plays ragtime-inspired rhythms, and the trumpet, clarinet, and trombone all 
improvise over the melody at the same time, New Orleans style (although the trumpet is featured and is most prominent in the mix).
Musical “Road Map”
Timings Commen T s
0:00–0:07 Instrumental introduction
0:07–0:31 Verse 1
0:31–0:56
0:56–1:19Chorus (1st section)(second section—same melody, different words)
1:19–2:08 Chorus repeated instrumentally, with trumpet, clarinet, and trombone improvising
2:08–2:222:33–2:592:59Repeat of chorus (1st section)Chorus pauses for brief trumpet “break”(second section—same melody, different words)Chorus ends; track fades out abruptly“Alexander’s Ragtime Band”
Artist:
 
Bessie Smith  
Music/Lyrics by Irving Berlin  
(published 1911)
Label:
 
Columbia (1927) C o NST r UCTIN g TIN  PAN  A lle Y 27ragtime” in 1909; “Stop That r ag,” “Dat Draggy r ag,” and “ o h, That Beautiful r ag” in 1910; 
and “
r
agtime Violin” and his best-known, “ Alexander’s 
r
agtime Band,” in 1911. Although this 
last song did not marry syncopation and the march tradition the way Joplin might have, the 
catchy, well-crafted tune, which balanced “dash and energy” with a “bow to negro music,” as 
g
ilbert Seldes noted in 1924,30 proved to be so popular that Berlin was subsequently billed as 
the Father of 
r
agtime. Charles Hamm described this process as one that “skimmed off superfi-
cial stylistic elements of a type of music originating among black musicians, and used these to 
give a somewhat different, exotic flavor to white music.”31
A similar but far more complicated pattern characterized Tin Pan Alley’s use of blues 
and jazz. The blues appeared at about the same time as ragtime. “But, unlike ragtime,” 
g
unther 
Schuller has noted, “the blues were improvised and as such were more successful in preserving 
the original and melodic patterns of African music.”32 Using, as writer Amiri Baraka (a.k.a. l eroi 
Jones) has pointed out, a “three-line verse form [that] springs from no readily apparent West-
ern source”33 and other African retentions, such as the call-and-response style and the flatted 
thirds and sevenths (“blue notes”) that typify the singing of many West African tribes, the blues are clearly part of the African American musical tradition. This, however, is not the impression 
one would have gotten if one followed the pattern of published and recorded blues songs com-
prising the “blues craze” that swept the country in the second decade of the twentieth century.
In 1912, four blues compositions were published: Chris Smith and Tim Brymn’s simply 
titled “The Blues” came first, followed by Hart Wand’s “Dallas Blues,” Arthur Seals’s “Baby Seals’ Blues,” and “Memphis Blues” by W . C. Handy. A fifth song, “Negro Blues” by white min-strel performer 
l
e 
r
oy “
l
asses” White, was copyrighted the same year but not published until 
the following (and was unfortunately re-titled “Nigger Blues”).34 There has been considerable 
debate about whether such compositions fit the strict defi-
nition of the blues. In 1959, blues historian Samuel Char-
ters took the narrow view: “Both Handy and Arthur Seals 
were Negroes, but the music that they titled ‘blues’ is more or less derived from the standard popular musical styles of the ‘coon song’ and ‘cake walk’ type. It is ironic that the first published piece in the Negro ‘blues’ idiom, ‘Dallas Blues,’ was written by a white man, Hart Wand.”
35 others 
have tended to grant more latitude in defining the blues, 
acknowledging the legitimacy of the early works by Smith 
and Brymn and Seals, and granting Handy’s claim to being 
the Father of the Blues.36HEAR MORE
“Alexander’s 
 
Ragtime Band” on 
MySearchLab
W. C. Handy was one of the first songwriters to bring a feel 
for the blues into the world of popular composition. Also a successful businessman, Handy established his own pub-
lishing house and record label with his partner Harry Pace.28 ro C k IN ’ o UTHandy was a trained composer who was as conversant with African American folkloric 
idioms as he was with musical notation. During this period, he published some of his most 
memorable compositions, including “St. 
l
ouis Blues” (1914), “Joe Turner Blues” (1916), and 
“Beale Street Blues” (1917). Accordingly, Baraka has argued that “W . C. Handy, with the pub-
lication of his various ‘blues compositions,’ invented [the blues] for a great many Americans 
and also showed that there was money to be made from it.”37 Handy’s success alerted Tin Pan 
Alley writers, who turned out a rash of so-called blues songs during this period.38 given re-
cord company practices at the time, these songs were invariably recorded by white singers. As 
r
obert Palmer has said, “The idea of making recordings by and for blacks hadn’t occurred to 
anyone in a position to do anything about it when the so-called blues craze hit around 1914–15, so [W . C.] Handy’s ‘blues’ and the blues of other popular tunesmiths, black and white, were recorded by whites, many of them specialists in Negro dialect material.”
39 Some, like Al Ber-
nard and Marion Harris, had a better feel for the music than most and were heartily endorsed 
by Handy himself. 
o
thers could be more easily dismissed as holdovers from minstrelsy.40 This 
situation would have defined most people’s understanding of the blues in the 1910s, before the onslaught of blues recordings by scores of African Americans in the 1920s (see Chapter 2).
e
arly appropriations of jazz created the impression among mainstream listeners that jazz 
was the product of “polite society” white dance bands, like that of Paul Whiteman, whom the 
media crowned the 
k
ing of Jazz. Actually, by the time the term jazz had come into popular  
usage, the style had been fed by a number of musical tributaries (minstrelsy, spirituals, ragtime, and blues, as well as 
e
uropean classical music and Tin Pan Alley pop) that contained African 
as well as 
e
uropean elements. Indeed, many African American jazz 
musicians were well versed in the 
e
uropean classics as well as the 
current Tin Pan Alley hits. Still, there is an important—though not absolute—distinction to be made between the oral tradition of im-
provisational, “hot” jazz and the written tradition of “sweet” dance music that defined white society orchestras like Paul Whiteman’s. Because high-society whites and middle-class blacks tended to shun 
the rough, hard-driving styles played in honky-tonks and brothels, the jazz showcased in up-scale venues aspired to a smoothness and cosmopolitanism that was less important in other places. As a result, most mainstream listeners associated jazz with sweet dance music, even though, by the time of Whiteman’s success, most jazz musicians, including African Americans, were playing scored arrangements that combined sweet and hot styles; some, like Fletcher Henderson and Duke 
e
llington, had improved on the model, creating the space for hot impro-
vised solos within innovatively structured arrangements.
Patterns of racial exclusion in the recording industry and later in broadcast radio skewed 
public perceptions of jazz even more. In 1917, for example, when Victor decided to take a chance on the new sound, the band it ended up recording was the all-white 
o
riginal Dixie -
land Jazz Band.41 Similarly, with few exceptions, radio broadcasts excluded black performers 
as a matter of policy. To most mainstream listeners, then, jazz—which was what just about all 
dance music was called at this time—was the music played by white dance bands.
The Tin Pan Alley songwriter who had the closest association with jazz was 
g
eorge 
 g
ershwin. Thoroughly conversant with the 
e
uropean classics as well as with popular styles, he Early appropriations of jazz created the 
impression among mainstream listeners 
that jazz was the product of “polite soci-
ety” white dance bands, like that of Paul 
Whiteman, whom the media crowned the King of Jazz. C o NST r UCTIN g TIN  PAN  A lle Y 29also had a genuine affinity for and personal interest in the music of African Americans. g ershwin 
sought to bridge the gap between art music and popular music. 
o
ne of the earliest and most famil-
iar fruits of this interest was his Rhapsody in Blue, written for “jazz band and piano” and originally 
performed at Aeolian Hall in New York in 1924 by Paul Whiteman’s orchestra, with 
g
ershwin 
at the piano. 
g
ershwin’s sensitivity to the subtle nuances of African American music led to the 
acceptance of his work among black as well as white audiences. His “Summertime,” originally 
written for the opera Porgy and Bess in 1935, quickly passed into the realm of a jazz classic, while “I 
g
ot 
r
hythm” from five years earlier became foundational to the subsequent evolution of jazz 
harmony. Yet 
g
ershwin’s identification with jazz was exceptional. 
o
verall, Tin Pan Alley took a 
largely isolationist stance toward the music and especially 
 
toward its black practitioners.
Dance Crazes, Latin Influences, Musical Theater, and Records
As early as 1909, records were a force to be reckoned with. According to r ussell Sanjek, “In 
1909, more than 27 million phonograph records and cylinders were manufactured, having a 
wholesale value of nearly $12 million.”42 While the larger proportion of their revenues would 
derive from the sale of sheet music for years to come, publishers and a growing number of pop-ular artists felt that additional revenue from record sales couldn’t hurt. Thus, Victor 
 
Herbert, 
a successful composer, and John Philip Sousa led the charge to revise the copyright laws. The 
resulting Copyright Act of 1909 mandated a royalty of two cents for each cylinder, record, or piano roll manufactured, in addition to the royalties already derived from live performances. Shortly after the passage of the act, the recording industry and Tin Pan Alley began to cross paths regularly, beginning with the dance fever that swept the country from 1910 to World War I and continuing with the growth of musical theater.
Tin Pan Alley hits such as Irving Berlin’s “
e
verybody’s Doin’ It” and “ Alexander’s 
r
ag-
time Band” and 
g
ilbert and Muir’s “Waiting for the 
r
obert 
e
. 
l
ee” were well suited to new 
social dances like the one-step, two-step, and turkey trot, and records made it easier for couples 
to practice at home. The dancing public eagerly followed in the footsteps of the cosmopol-itan husband-and-wife dance team of Vernon and Irene Castle, who popularized these new dances with the able assistance of the African American bandleader and composer James 
r
eese 
 e
urope, whom they hired as their music director. The Castles pushed the envelope further after 
returning from Paris with the Argentine tango, which marked the beginnings of what John Storm 
r
oberts has called the “
l
atin tinge” in mainstream popular music.43 This being the rag-
time era, Tin Pan Alley was quick to issue a number of “ragtime tangos” with titles like “Tango 
r
ag” and “
e
verybody Tango.” The tango also had an effect on the African American music that 
became popular in the mainstream; it can be heard most prominently on the tango introduction 
to W . C. Handy’s “St. 
l
ouis Blues.” In addition to their string of successful Castle House dance 
studios and lucrative public appearances, the Castles had a deal with Victor to produce a series of dance records. 
e
urope supervised the project, providing opportunities for dozens of African 
American musicians to participate in (and shape) mainstream culture, and also contributing to the 
l
atin tinge by adding Puerto 
r
ican musicians to the mix.
e
urope had organized the Clef Club in New York as a black musicians’ union of sorts 
that could furnish dance orchestras of almost any size, like the 125-piece orchestra—fifty-eight 30 ro C k IN ’ o UTbanjos, mandolins, and bandores; ten pianos; five drum kits, and more—he assembled for a 
1912 Carnegie Hall concert, which was a first for a black orchestra.44 Because of his asso-
ciation with the Castles, 
e
urope’s Society 
o
rchestra was signed to Victor on December 29, 
1913—another first for an African American ensemble.45 They produced eight dance records 
for Victor that remained profitable for years. After the outbreak of World War I, 
e
urope joined 
an all-black regiment where he was asked to organize “the best damn brass band in the United 
States Army.”46 Simultaneously, the Jones Act of 1917 made all Puerto r icans citizens of the 
United States. Thus, while his partner Noble Sissle auditioned musicians in Harlem, 
e
urope 
recruited an additional eighteen darker-skinned Puerto 
r
icans from the island and formed the 
369th Infantry 
r
egiment Hell Fighters Band. After months of trench warfare and reportedly 
spectacular concerts throughout France, the Hell Fighters returned home to a hero’s welcome 
(including a parade up Fifth Avenue to Harlem), and toured the United States, recording 22 sides of ragtime and jazz for the Pathé label before 
e
urope was tragically murdered at the hand 
of drummer Herbert Wright on May 9, 1919.47The Clef Club, organized by James Reese Europe, was an African American musicians’ union that could 
supply orchestras of varying sizes on request. In 1914, Europe’s own Syncopated Society Orchestra was signed to Victor, becoming the first African American ensemble to secure a recording contract.
 C o NST r UCTIN g TIN  PAN  A lle Y 31In addition to dance music, musical theater became another force linking Tin Pan  Alley 
and the record companies; its value became apparent during World War I, when 
 
British 
g
ram-
ophone made successful recordings of the songs from Business as Usual and two of 
 
Irving 
Berlin’s shows, Watch Your Step and Cheep. Afterward, Victor—followed by Columbia and 
 e
dison—emulated the success of its British partner by recording the best-known stage en-
tertainers in the United States. The singer who created the strongest bridge between Tin Pan 
Alley and the world of records was Al Jolson. His 1919 Columbia recording of 
g
ershwin’s 
“Swanee,” which he usually performed live in blackface and white gloves, sold over 2 million records. This figure was equaled by the 1920 Victor recordings of “Whispering” and “The Japanese Sandman,” two Tin Pan Alley favorites performed by the Paul Whiteman 
o
rchestra. 
Following these hits, popular stage entertainers like 
g
eorge M. Cohan, Nora Bayes, and Sophie 
Tucker soon found themselves pushing Tin Pan Alley songs on records.
The Tin Pan Alley songsters organized the American Society of Composers, Authors, and 
Publishers (ASCAP) in 1914 to recover royalties on performances of their copyrighted music. 
This is done by issuing a blanket license for the use of any selection in the catalogue to live-performance venues such as hotels and nightclubs (and later radio and television) and then dis-tributing these royalties to writers and publishers. Membership in ASCAP was skewed toward writers of show tunes and semiserious works, and included 
r
ichard 
r
odgers, 
l
orenz Hart, Cole Porter, 
g
eorge 
g
ershwin, Irving Berlin, 
and 
g
eorge M. Cohan. 
o
f the society’s 170 charter members, only six 
were black: Harry Burleigh, Will Marion Cook, J. 
r
osamond Johnson, 
James Weldon Johnson, Cecil Mack, and Will Tyers.48 While other 
black writers and composers who were schooled in musical notation 
(W . C. Handy, Duke 
e
llington) were able to gain entrance to ASCAP , 
the vast majority of black artists were routinely excluded from the 
society and thereby systematically denied the full benefit of copyright protection. Until 1939, when a rival organization was formed, ASCAP was a closed society with a near monopoly on all copyrighted music. As proprietor of its members’ compositions, ASCAP controlled the use of any selection in its catalogue, thereby exercising considerable power in shaping public taste.
Commercial Broadcasting: A Very Private Enterprise
At the beginning of the 1920s, the outlook for records was rosy. While gross revenues hit an 
all-time high of $106 million in 1921, however, shrewd observers might have noticed a cloud on the horizon—radio. Two years after the advent of commercial radio broadcasting in 1920, 
annual record revenues showed a decline. By 1933, the height of the 
g
reat Depression, they 
had plummeted to an unprecedented low of $6 million.
The scientific properties of radio waves had been known since the latter half of the 
nineteenth century. In 1886, 
g
uglielmo Marconi developed the first practical application of 
wireless communication. He secured a British patent in 1896 and, a year later, established 
the Wireless Telegraph and Signal Company. In 1899, he founded American Marconi in the United States and set his sights on nothing short of a worldwide monopoly on wireless Membership in ASCAP was skewed 
toward writers of show tunes and 
semiserious works, and included 
 
Richard Rodgers, Lorenz Hart, Cole Por-
ter, George Gershwin, Irving Berlin, and George M. Cohan. Of the society’s 170 charter members, only six were black.32 ro C k IN ’ o UTcommunication. In its formative stages, wireless communication was used primarily for teleg-
raphy. 
r
eginald Fessenden, who worked with 
e
dison, made the first long-distance telephonic 
transmission in 1906, thus laying the basis for radio broadcasting. However, 
l
ee de Forest, 
inventor of the audion—an early version of the vacuum tube that could generate, modulate, 
amplify, and detect radio energy—was more widely recognized for his dramatic 1908 broad-casts of phonograph music from the 
e
iffel Tower and his 1910 broadcast of Caruso from the 
Metropolitan 
o
pera in New York. As a result, it is de Forest who is known as the principal 
pioneer of broadcast radio.49
The Growth of Network Radio
During World War I, there were tremendous advances in radio because competing companies 
suspended their patent disputes for the war effort. Seeing international communication as a key element in the balance of world power after the war ended, President Woodrow Wilson 
noted that British domination of radio—represented by Marconi’s company—would not be 
satisfactory. In 1919, with the active support of the U.S. govern-
ment, 
g
eneral 
e
lectric (
ge
) harnessed patriotism to the profit mo-
tive to engineer a “solution” to the problem of foreign ownership of the airwaves. When all was said and done, the operations and assets of American Marconi were transferred to a new entity—the 
r
adio Corporation of America (
r
CA). 
r
CA was set up as a holding 
company for the major radio patent holders in the United States. Its stock was divided among 
ge
 and Westinghouse, which would 
manufacture radio equipment; American Telephone and Telegraph 
(AT&T), which would manufacture transmitters and control telephonic communication; and 
the former stockholders of American Marconi.50
With the future of North American radio firmly in U.S. hands, a regular schedule of 
broadcasting began in the United States. In November 1920, Westinghouse’s 
k
D
k
A went on 
the air from the roof of the company’s Pittsburgh factory to broadcast the results of the Hard-
ing/Cox presidential election. Within two to three years, and with few precedents to guide 
their development, nearly 600 stations across the country were licensed to operate. 
e
xisting 
legislation, designed primarily to govern maritime telegraphy, did not anticipate the impact 
of commercialized telephonic broadcasting; but by the mid-1920s, the structures and practices that would dominate radio for the next two decades would be in place.
r
CA formed the National Broadcasting Company (NBC), a twenty-five-station network 
extending from New York to 
k
ansas City that went on the air with a most ambitious pro-
gram, featuring the New York Symphony 
o
rchestra at the 
g
rand Ballroom of the Waldorf-
Astoria and a number of remote feeds including several popular dance bands and vaudeville 
stars such as Will 
r
ogers. By 1926, NBC was operating two semiautonomous networks out 
of New York—the more powerful 
r
ed Network offering news, semiserious works, and light 
opera, and the Blue Network, broadcasting more popular fare. Heading these networks was 
David Sarnoff, who had envisioned consumer broadcasting as early as 1916. “I have in mind a plan of development which would make radio a ‘household utility,’ in the same sense as the In 1919, with the active support of the 
U.S. government, General Electric (GE) 
harnessed patriotism to the profit mo-
tive to engineer a “solution” to the prob -
lem of foreign ownership of the airwaves. 
When all was said and done, the opera-tions and assets of American 
 
Marconi 
were transferred to a new entity—the Radio Corporation of America (RCA). C o NST r UCTIN g TIN  PAN  A lle Y 33piano or phonograph,” he wrote in a memo to his superiors. “The idea is to bring music into 
the home by wireless.”51 Sarnoff became president of r CA in 1930, the year the company was 
severed from 
ge
 in a government-led antitrust suit, and was the chair of its board from 1947 
until he retired in 1969.
In 1927, Arthur Judson, a violinist turned artist manager, began the Columbia Phono -
graph Broadcasting System with financial backing from the Columbia Phonograph Company, 
which eventually withdrew from the project. The fledgling network received an influx of cash from one of its main advertisers, the owner of 
l
a Palina cigars—whose son, William S. Paley, 
was installed as the network’s new president in 1928. At this time, the name of the network was shortened to the Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS). Within months, CBS was NBC’s major competitor, and coast-to-coast broadcasting was a reality. Paley and Sarnoff would be the dominant figures in broadcasting for years, each controlling vast media empires.
Although radio developed with little government interference, it was closely monitored 
by the National Alliance of Broadcasters (NAB), which recommended an extension of govern-
ment regulatory powers. These recommendations were codified in the 
r
adio Act of 1927 and 
expanded in the Communications Act of 1934, which created the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Still, the law lagged behind technological advances and ownership pat-terns embodied in the predominance of network broadcasting. By 1938, the networks were using 98 percent of the available nighttime wattage, and NBC and CBS had already locked up fifty of the fifty-two clear channels—special frequencies allocated to stations with large transmitters positioned to broadcast over great distances with minimal interference—as well as 75 percent of the most powerful regional stations. In terms of ownership patterns, radio had developed as a very private enterprise indeed. Programming, however, was another mat-ter entirely.
The Advertisers versus the Programmers
Until World War II, the four national networks that dominated radio viewed the market as 
one monolithic listening audience. Their strategy was to pull in as broad a slice of this total listenership as possible—hence the term broadcasting. 
e
arly radio pioneers felt that the new 
medium should nourish the spirit and raise the nation’s cultural level through programs of 
news, literature, drama, and concert music. While this belief did little for either the fortunes of Tin Pan Alley or the cultural preferences of huge segments of the U.S. public, it did affect the programming decisions of commercial station owners, who demanded propriety and “good taste” in everything from program content to advertising. Direct advertising of a product was permitted only during business hours; at night, only a discreet mention of a program sponsor’s name was allowed. When it appeared that such principles might somehow be compromised, “cultured” industry stalwarts like 
l
ee de Forest
lost no opportunity to cry out in earnest protest against the crass commercialism, the etheric van-
dalism of the vulgar hucksters, agencies, advertisers, station owners—who lacking awareness of 
their grand opportunities and moral responsibilities to make of radio an uplifting experience, con-tinue to enslave and sell for quick cash the grandest medium which has yet been given to man to help upward his struggling spirit.
5234 ro C k IN ’ o UTAs the twenties roared past most nineteenth-century conventions, the old guard of 
broadcasting often found itself locking horns with a new breed of unabashedly commercial 
advertisers. In many ways, Sarnoff and Paley personified the two camps. As a visionary corpo-
rate executive, Sarnoff was immersed in the public service aspects of the medium. He viewed 
radio as an “electronic library” that brought useful information, 
uplifting literature, and tasteful music into the home. (
o
f course, as 
an equally good businessman, he was not oblivious to the fact that such services would sell millions of the radio receivers his com -
pany manufactured.) Paley, on the other hand, came to radio as the 
advertising manager of his father’s cigar factory. His product needed a harder sell, the kind that was considered crass by the old guard. Fortunately for popular music, advertisers like Paley, who catered to “vulgar” popular tastes as a matter of necessity, ended up playing the 
major role in determining the course of radio programming.
Consistent with radio’s educational mission, news had always been a staple of radio pro-
gramming. Drama also added to radio’s aura of respectability. The bulk of radio program-ming, however, was music. 
e
ver-vigilant concerning the economic self-interest of its members, 
ASCAP notified radio early of its intention to include musical broadcasts among its sources of copyright royalties. Commercial advertising had placed musical broadcasts within the “public performance for profit” provision of the 1909 Copyright Act. By the end of 1924, Sanjek notes, “ ASCAP income from 199 radio licenses was $130,000, up from the previous year’s $35,000 but far from the million predicted when the drive to collect from broadcasters began in the summer of 1922.”
53 Dissatisfied with its share, ASCAP complained that radio had not simply 
killed 
 
records and vaudeville, it had killed popular music itself. Publishers and broadcasters 
thus 
 
began an adversarial relationship that continued well into the 1960s.
In 1934, ASCAP’s radio royalties were $850,000—still not the sought-after $1 million. 
By 1937, however, its radio royalties had jumped to $5.9 million, thanks to advertisers. To 
draw listeners—and thus increase sales—the advertisers supported “dialect” comedy and pop-ular song programs rather than dramatic series or concerts of classical or semiclassical music. Pepsodent toothpaste, in this sense, turned Freeman 
g
osden and Charles Correll, the white 
creators of the “black voice” comedy series Amos ‘n’ Andy, into the highest paid entertainers in broadcasting. (As usual, racial parody could be counted on to turn a profit.) Advertisers also provided the listening audience with “live” musical entertainment—and, at the same time, skirted the stringent advertising code by promoting artists with the sponsoring corporation in 
their group name: the A&P supermarket chain sponsored the A&P 
g
ypsies; Ipana toothpaste, 
the Ipana Troubadours; and Cliquot Club soft drinks, the Cliquot Club 
e
skimos.
o
ne of the most interesting national prime-time experiments in popular music was spon-
sored on NBC by the American Tobacco Company, maker of 
l
ucky Strike cigarettes. Company 
president 
g
eorge Washington Hill directed B. A. 
r
olfe and his thirty-five-piece orchestra to 
play only popular dance music with “no extravagant, bizarre, involved arrangements,” and in-vited listeners to send in their song preferences. With Hill’s advertising budget of $20 million, even staid NBC executives “suffered his brash, boorish behavior and joined him at Sunday-morning rehearsals to test the ‘foxtrotability’ of every selection programmed.”
54 The show 
evolved into the famous Your Hit Parade, one of the most popular shows to hit network radio. Fortunately for popular music, advertisers 
like Paley, who catered to “vulgar” popular 
tastes as a matter of necessity, ended up 
playing the major role in determining the 
course of radio programming. C o NST r UCTIN g TIN  PAN  A lle Y 35In focusing solely on musical selections that were popular among the listening audience, Your 
Hit Parade conferred a measure of power in determining public taste on the consumer. The show’s admittedly flawed and probably rigged rankings foreshadowed the more “scientific” 
methods of rating that determine programming formats today.
The tension between “culture” and straight commercial entertainment in radio program-
ming continued until the economic imperatives of the 
g
reat Depression put the advertisers in 
a position to determine the tone of radio more than the programmers. During the Depression, 
as 
e
rik Barnouw has written, “Destitute families that had to give up an icebox or furniture or 
bedding still clung to the radio as to a last link with humanity.”55 Such loyalty tipped the bal-
ance of power in programming to the side of the advertisers. As a result, radio has tended to 
follow the popular tastes of consumers. This tendency had quite surprising consequences when 
rock ‘n’ roll arrived in the early 1950s.
Tin Pan Alley Goes Hollywood . . . and Latin
If radio never quite measured up to ASCAP’s musical or financial expectations, the creation of 
another new medium—talking films—held out the promise of even greener pastures for Tin Pan Alley composers. A number of processes were developed for adding sound to film. In 1924, 
AT&T’s Western 
e
lectric developed the vitaphone process of synchronizing disc recordings 
with film, and it was purchased by Warner Brothers. Warner’s classic 1927 film, The Jazz Singer  
starring Al Jolson, often remembered as the first talkie, was in fact a silent film with songs. 
ge
 had developed a process for photographing sound onto film in 1922, and in 1928, David 
 
Sarnoff organized 
r
CA Photophone to exploit the process. Sarnoff then developed a theater 
chain, 
r
adio-
k
eith-
o
rpheum (
rko
), which controlled about 12 percent of all first-run outlets 
in the United States. By 1930, sound had been installed in 83 percent of the country’s theaters.
The runaway success of Metro-
g
oldwyn-Mayer’s (M
g
M’s) 
Broadway Melody, released in 1929, made it clear that mainstream 
popular music (i.e., Tin Pan Alley compositions) would play a major 
role in talking films. 
r
ecord companies rushed to record dance and 
vocal versions of the film’s hit songs, including “
g
ive My 
r
egards 
to Broadway” and the title song. The major motion picture com-panies—Warner, United Artists, Fox, Paramount, Universal, and M
g
M—all planned musicals. To secure entertainers with guaranteed appeal, they raided 
the most popular entertainment medium available to them—network radio. Accordingly, The Big Broadcast (1932), a film about radio, numbered among its artists 
k
ate Smith, the Bo-
swell Sisters, and the Mills Brothers, making it one of the few early Hollywood musicals to use African American talent. Also starring in the film was Bing Crosby, who would set the standard for pop vocals until World War II.
o
riginally steeped in minstrelsy (he actually appeared on film in blackface), Crosby began 
his singing career in 1926 as one of the 
r
hythm Boys in the Paul Whiteman band. In 1931, he 
launched his solo recording career and landed his first radio show. He recorded with everyone from Al Jolson and 
l
ouis Armstrong to Paul Whiteman and Duke 
e
llington. Crosby pioneered The runaway success of Metro- 
Goldwyn-Mayer’s (MGM’s) Broadway 
Melody, released in 1929, made it 
clear that mainstream popular music 
(i.e., Tin Pan Alley compositions) would play a major role in talking films.36 ro C k IN ’ o UTa style of singing called “crooning,” a laid-back, more personal approach that allowed for 
greater vocal nuance and feelings of intimacy between artist and audience. Crooning was made possible when the microphone replaced the acoustic megaphone and singers no longer had to 
project their voices to the far reaches of a nightclub or concert hall to be heard. In addition, hits 
like “Sweet 
l
eilani” (1937), a pseudo-Hawaiian number from the 
o
scar-winning film Waikiki 
Wedding, and “San Antonio 
r
ose” (1940), a western swing song penned by Bob Wills, fed the 
mainstream attraction for exotic cultural influences. Crosby went on to star in over sixty musi-cal films. His recording of Irving Berlin’s “White Christmas” from the 1942 film Holiday Inn sold more than 30 million copies and entered the pop charts eighteen years in a row.
56
Fox was the first major Hollywood studio to ally itself with a Tin Pan Alley publishing 
house: De Sylva, Brown, and Henderson, which turned out a string of hit musical comedies in-
cluding Good News, Three Cheers, Hold Everything, and Sunny Side Up. In turn, Warner Brothers 
acquired a dozen New York publishing houses. The studio used the songwriting team of Harry 
Warren and Al Dubin to score most of Busby Berkeley’s choreographic extravaganzas, such as 42nd Street,  Gold Diggers, and Footlight Parade in 1933. Family-oriented Broadway musicals, 
such as Jerome 
k
ern’s Babes in Toyland and The Merry Widow by 
r
odgers and Hart, were re-
produced for the silver screen in 1934. The indefatigable Irving Berlin, whose fee for a musical film score was $75,000 plus a percentage of gross receipts, contributed hit songs to films like Puttin’ on the Ritz (1930), Top Hat (1935), Follow the Fleet (1936), and On the Avenue (1937). By 
1937, the music publishing houses associated with Hollywood shared 65 percent of ASCAP’s publisher dividends and continued to do so for the next decade.
57
Another aspect of the connection between Hollywood musicals and mainstream culture 
bears mentioning. In the buildup to World War II, the United States, concerned about hemi-
spheric solidarity, instituted the 
g
ood Neighbor policy toward 
l
atin America. This policy went HEAR MORE
“Bing Crosby” on 
MySearchLab
One of the most popular entertainers of 
the early twentieth century, Al Jolson is shown in a scene from The Jazz Singer, 
performing in blackface. Later in his 
 career he discontinued the practice. C o NST r UCTIN g TIN  PAN  A lle Y 37into high gear in the late 1930s and was embraced by Hollywood, which flooded the United 
States and international markets with films featuring 
l
atin American themes, stories, images, 
music, and locations.58 Many of these films were big-budget musical comedies, with U.S. stars 
appearing alongside well-known 
l
atin American entertainers. They were intended to avoid 
the despicable stereotypes of earlier 
l
atin-themed films in their attempts to distinguish among 
the national characteristics, geographical boundaries, and cultural differences of various 
l
atin 
American countries. 
e
ven with good intentions, however, Hollywood could conflate Buenos 
Aires, 
r
io de Janeiro, and Havana as easily as Tin Pan Alley could confuse a tango, a samba, 
and a rumba.
All the major Hollywood studios participated in this exercise. Indeed, some 
l
atin-themed 
films that fit the above description predated the 
g
ood Neighbor policy, such as Cuban Love Song 
(1931), which starred Jimmy Durante, 
l
awrence Tibbett, and 
l
upe Velez and featured 
e
rnesto 
l
ecuona’s 
o
rchestra performing “The Peanut Vendor,” and Flying Down to Rio (1933), which 
first paired Fred Astaire and 
g
inger 
r
ogers and featured Vincent Youmans’s 
 
“Carioca.” By the 
late 1930s, Fox led the pack with Brazilian singer and dancer Carmen 
 
Miranda, whose rivet-
ing performance of “South American Way” in the Broadway revue The Streets of Paris (1939) 
captivated the U.S. audience and led to a string of musical films, including Down 
 
Argentine 
Wa y (1940), Weekend in Havana and That Night in Rio (1941), and Busby Berkeley’s The Gang’s 
All Here (1943), in which she performed the “Uncle Sam-ba.” Typically performing in carni-valesque outfits and a headdress piled high with tropical fruit, the excess that defined 
 
Miranda’s 
image could easily be taken as a demeaning caricature of all things 
l
atin. Still, her signature 
performances and nonthreatening sexuality turned her into one of the highest-paid actors in Hollywood.
The 
g
ood Neighbor period coincided with the appearance of a new song type in the U.S. 
cultural landscape that 
g
ustavo Pérez Firmat has referred to as the “latune”—“a tune with a 
l
atin beat and an 
e
nglish language lyric.”59 Coupled with the influx of new l atin American 
immigrants, this new type of song created the conditions under which “genuine and imitation 
l
atin songs both competed and reinforced each other.”60 In Cuban Love Song “The Peanut Ven-
dor” was performed alongside the title song, which was considered by Firmat to be the first 
Anglophone bolero. “Cuban 
l
ove Song” was straight Tin Pan Alley pop in a 
l
atin-themed film. 
But “The Peanut Vendor” was originally “ El Manisero,” a Cuban composition that was mar -
keted as a rumba (spelled rhumba in the United States). For the U.S. market, the song was fitted 
with 
e
nglish lyrics; it sold over 1 million copies of sheet music for 
e
. B. Marks (which listed 
600 
l
atin music tunes in its catalogue) and may well have been the first million-selling 
l
atin 
music record, too. It has since been recorded over 160 times.
The Tin Pan Alley writers who contributed to the “latune songbook” included luminar-
ies such as 
g
eorge 
g
ershwin and Irving Berlin. Veteran songwriters Harry Warren and Mack 
g
ordon penned all the “
l
atin” material for Carmen Miranda’s musicals, including “I Yi Yi Yi 
Yi,” “Chica Chica Boom Chic,” and “They Met in 
r
io.” Though a broad range of 
l
atin Ameri-
can sources were appropriated, Cuban rhythms proved to be the most popular. Cole Porter 
classics such as “In the Still of the Night,” “Night and Day,” “I’ve 
g
ot You Under My Skin,” 
and “Begin the Beguine” reflect his fascination with Cuban sounds, and, like latunes in gen-eral, they have been criticized for trivializing vibrant 
l
atin music. In this climate, 
e
rnesto 38 ro C k IN ’ o UTlecuona’s “ Andalucia” could easily be morphed into the decidedly un- l atin “The Breeze and I” 
with enough momentum to reach number one on Your Hit Parade. At the same time, original 
l
atin selections like “Siboney” and “Perfidia” passed into the realm of “ American standards.”
The 
g
ood Neighbor years brought to the fore performers like Xavier Cugat and Desi 
Arnaz, who could negotiate the demands of the pop market with just enough 
l
atin-ness to 
thrive. But they also created the space for groups like Machito’s 
Afro-Cubans, who played a “high-octane rumba style” generally for 
darker-skinned audiences that could “rattle the fenders off a jeep.”61 
If African American and 
e
uropean influences continued to vie for 
what would become the dominant force in the U.S. popular culture 
dialectic, it was clear that 
l
atin music had become the primary 
source for further rhythmic innovation and exotic seasoning.
In the early twentieth century, established Tin Pan Alley publishing houses consolidated their 
interests across popular music genres and in every medium used to disseminate popular music—sheet music, radio, Broadway plays, Hollywood films, and (to a lesser extent) records. At times, Tin Pan Alley’s relationship with the recording industry conflicted with its other interests. Radio and movies, for example, netted Tin Pan Alley a hefty sum but hurt the recording industry. After 
all, the consumer did not have to buy a record to hear the latest hit; he or she needed only to turn on the radio. Movie music remained in demand for only as long as the film was in circulation: “When Hollywood created a glut of as many as six or eight songs in a single production, it led to a superabundance of recorded movie music, which sold pictures but not recordings. A Hollywood-connected publisher could no longer assure record makers that a specific song in a forthcoming film would be the plugged hit.”
62 Therefore, what were profitable ventures for Tin Pan Alley 
songwriters and publishers may not have been equally lucrative for recording companies. During 
the 1920s and 1930s, record companies had to look elsewhere to realize the financial potential 
of their product. It may not be purely coincidental that they exploited the markets for blues and 
country music at precisely the moment that record sales began to decline.LEARN MORE
Chapter Test on 
MySearchLabIf African American and European influ-
ences continued to vie for what would 
become the dominant force in the U.S. 
popular culture dialectic, it was clear 
that Latin music had become the primary source for further rhythmic innovation and exotic seasoning.  39
2
In the creation of their distinctive brand of popular   
music, the most creative Tin Pan Alley songwriters absorbed outside in-
fluences like aural sponges. For all their incredible breadth of influences, 
however, they were in many ways narrowly provincial, products of the 
 
urban Northeast and Hollywood. Charles Hamm, among others, has ar-
gued that “Tin Pan Alley songs were for white, urban, literate, middle- 
and upper-class Americans,” but that is not to say these songs did not reach other audiences.1 
The available evidence suggests a significant degree of cross-cultural awareness and mixing. 
When Hamm adds that blacks and poor whites “had their own distinctive types of . . . oral-
tradition music,” he is calling attention to what we would identify today as blues, jazz, and 
country music. Starting around 1920, record companies categorized this “oral-tradition” music using terms like race and hillbilly music, reserving what came to be known as the more general “pop” category for mainstream styles. We are therefore forced to grapple with the question of how one addresses a history of widespread cultural crossover in a society stratified by class and segregated by race.
Prior to recording, the music business hadn’t given that much thought to targeted mar-
keting strategies or to categorizing music by style. Tin Pan Alley songsters knew only too well that songs do not automatically belong to a genre. The whole point 
of plugging a song was to get as many people as possible to buy the sheet music and perform the music in any way they wanted to. As Elijah Wald reminds us, “‘After the Ball’ was performed by amateur parlor players, string quartets, brass bands, Appalachian fiddlers, LEARN MORE
Learning objectives 
on MySearchLabBlues, Jazz, and 
Country: The Segregation of  Popular Music
Prior to recording, the music busi-
ness hadn’t given that much thought 
to targeted marketing strategies or to 
categorizing music by style.40 ro C ki N ’ ou TAfrican American guitarists, blackface minstrels, and vaudeville sopranos.”2 in this sense, the 
market for sheet music was treated like an undifferentiated mass, albeit one with an imagined 
white middle class at its core. 
i
nitially records were treated the same way. Particular songs 
were important and it mattered less who recorded them. As concert stars and well-known 
bands began to make recording more a part of their careers and records became more popular, audiences began to appreciate what was distinctive and exciting about a particular artist’s ver-sion of a song. From this point on, songs started to be identified by who recorded them rather than who wrote them. 
i
n many ways, the history of blues, jazz, and country is the history of 
these musics on record. And that history has been shaped as much by what record companies and folklorists wanted to present to the public as by what these musicians actually played.
3 
Searching for ways to direct audiences to records that would be appropriate for them, record 
companies chose categories that mirrored the social divisions of 
u
.S. society. As a result, mu-
sics that enjoyed considerable overlap in cultural terms have been documented and discussed as 
if they had separate histories.
Blues, Jazz, and Country: More Equal than Separate
it is difficult to trace the cultural inputs that went into the creation of grassroots music in the 
first decades of the twentieth century. At street level, of course, considerable cross-cultural 
contact occurred; it was part of everyday life. To offer but one example: Polk Brockman owned 
a furniture store in Atlanta, Georgia. His customers cut across racial lines. 
i
n the early 1920s, 
Brockman, like other furniture store owners, expanded his business to include phonographs. 
Being attuned to the musical tastes of his diverse clientele, Brockman and others like him—Sam Price in Dallas and Henry C. Speir in Jackson—often served as local talent scouts for record companies.
4 in fact, Brockman had a very lucrative sideline supplying both black and 
white talent to the 
ok
eh 
r
ecord Company, where black artists were assigned to the label’s 
14000 race series and white artists to its 15000 hillbilly series. As marketing categories, des-
ignations like race and hillbilly intentionally separated artists along racial lines and conveyed 
the impression that their music came from different sources. Noth -
ing could have been further from the truth. Across the social divide 
of segregation, these artists were aware of and influenced by each other’s work. 
i
n cultural terms, blues, jazz, and country were far 
more equal than they were separate.
The 
u
nited States can be justifiably proud of the melding of African and European con-
ventions that produced the blues, if not the circumstances of the music’s creation. 
o
riginally, 
the term blues was not a racially coded reference. As the description of a mood or feeling, it 
dates back to sixteenth-century England. “
i
n the nineteenth century, it was a common expres-
sion in the 
u
nited States,” Samuel Charters has reported. “The word was used occasionally 
in song titles, but as a slang expression, without reference to any Negro musical style.”5 The 
evolution of the blues as a fundamentally African American musical genre can be traced back 
to the shouts, field hollers, and work songs of slavery, which followed the call-and-response 
style of, say, a foreman, who set the pace of work by uttering a phrase answered in rhythm by As marketing categories, designations 
like race and hillbilly intentionally sepa-
rated artists along racial lines and con-
veyed the impression that their music 
came from different sources. Blu ES , J A zz, AND  Cou NT ry  41the laborers. From these pre-blues forms, which were largely improvised and unaccompanied, 
a crude blues form developed that would evolve into what came to be known as country blues.6 
Gradually, vocalized proto-blues combined with instrumental and harmonic accompaniment, absorbing influence from the “Ethiopian airs” of early minstrelsy “with strange modal har-
monies and sharply rhythmic dissonance”
7 and the “Negro spirituals” popularized later in the 
nineteenth century by the Fisk Jubilee Singers, who presented “spirituals in choral versions 
that were greatly influenced by white singing societies.”8
one of the more compelling—if oversimplified—stories about the birth of jazz 
traces its origins to the tripartite division of New 
o
rleans society into black, white, and 
Creole social circles. 
u
ntil New 
o
rleans adopted a set of Jim Crow laws that reclassi-
fied Creoles of mixed French and African descent as “black,” they had enjoyed many of 
the privileges of white society, among them formal musical training and membership in 
white brass and string bands. “The emergence of jazz,” according to jazz scholar 
i
ngrid 
Monson, “has often been explained as the meeting of the uptown African American 
brass and string band tradition of blues-drenched aurally transmitted music, with the downtown Creole band tradition of instrumental virtuosity, musical literacy, and train-ing in classical music.”
9 The resulting sound combined improvisatory blues styles with 
the notated tradition of syncopated rags. 
i
ndeed, for a time, the line separating ragtime 
dance music from jazz was not entirely clear; many critics used the terms interchange-
ably. New 
o
rleans jazz pioneer Sidney Bechet claimed that white northerners changed 
the name to describe the music of the white dance bands who were catching on to the style. “
i
n this sense,” Wald has argued, “jazz was like rock ‘n’ roll, a new name that sig-
nified white dancers catching up with black styles, rather than a new music.”10
Country music was also shaped by multicultural influences. By the account of country 
music historian Bill C. Malone, Southern folk music was “British as its core” but further com-
prised a diverse blend of regional ethnic strains that included Native Americans of the back-
country, the intermixture of Spanish and French elements in the Mississippi Valley, Mexicans 
of Southern Texas, and African Americans whose presence pervaded the Southern 
u
nited 
States.11 As country music evolved into a commercial enterprise, one could add to Malone’s 
list the influence of German and Swiss yodelers, 
i
talian mandolin players, and Hawaiian string 
bands. Amidst these various strains that contributed to the early formation of country music, 
a central binding agent was the fiddle, the principal instrument of Southern music making from the eighteenth century to the moment when the first country music recordings were made by an aging veteran performer named Fiddlin’ John Carson. 
o
ften termed the “devil’s 
instrument,” the fiddle routinely figured as the lone accompaniment to social dancing, causing 
consternation among hard-line Baptists and worshipers of other denominations for whom in-strumental music was forbidden.
12 Fiddling contests were crucial public events in the Southern 
states during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and through them a repository 
of tunes circulated that created a widely recognized sense of traditional Southern music and 
formed part of the basis for the early country music industry.13
Black fiddlers were also well represented in the antebellum South and in parts of the 
North as well. 
i
ndeed, the fiddle vied with the banjo as the most common instrument played 
by African Americans throughout the nineteenth century, making it no accident that the two 42 ro C ki N ’ ou Tinstruments were so integral to blackface minstrelsy. From the 1920s on, country fiddlers 
borrowed heavily from blues and jazz, using syncopated rhythms, improvisational styles, and call-and-response patterns. Despite its African derivation and the existence of a significant tra-
dition of black performance on the instrument, the banjo became progressively less identified 
with black musical styles over time.
14 As the instrument was popularized through minstrelsy, it 
underwent modernization through the addition of a fifth string and a fretted neck. During the 
late nineteenth century efforts were made to “elevate” the banjo into a parlor instrument, after 
which it found a home in ragtime and early jazz, only becoming a defining icon of Southern 
white tradition in the 1930s and 1940s with the advent of bluegrass.15
The other primary string instrument of American music, the guitar, had a similarly 
diverse trajectory. Along with the banjo and mandolin, the guitar was subject to signifi-
cant enthusiasm as part of the “Banjo-Mandolin-Guitar” movement that extended from 
the 1880s to the 1920s.16 in this capacity, it was primarily a parlor instrument played 
by middle-class whites who performed a mixed selection of classical music and popular 
songs, supported by the growing sheet music industry of Tin Pan Alley. 
 
During the 
same years, the instrument spread among working-class and rural whites and African 
Americans, who pioneered an alternate set of techniques that involved bending strings to emulate the human voice and patterns of finger picking that combined harmonic and melodic elements with complicated counter-rhythms. These techniques would be-come 
 
foundational to the styles of blues, jazz, and country music. Meanwhile, 
 
Hawaiian 
 
natives who obtained the guitar from Portuguese colonists developed the technique of steel 
 
guitar playing in the late nineteenth century, through which notes were sounded 
by 
 
running a metal bar over the strings. When Hawaiian musicians toured the mainland 
u
nited States in the first decades of the twentieth century, their approach had a wide 
 
influence and became incorporated into the nascent sound of country music; black gui-
tarists in the emerging blues style created comparable effects by fretting their instru-ments with knife blades, bottlenecks, and other devices.
17
Neither vocal style nor choice of material was limited by race. For instance,  yodeling, 
most readily identified with country music, has a more complicated history than one might 
suspect. Certain pre-blues shouts and hollers were described in John W . Work’s American 
 
Negro Songs as a “fragmentary bit of a yodel, half sung, half yelled.”18 yodeling became part 
of 
 
American minstrelsy early on. Although Jimmie 
r
odgers popularized it on record, black 
musicians had also learned the technique. Blues artists contemporary with 
r
odgers, such as 
Stovepipe Johnson (“Devilish Blues,” 1928) and Tampa 
r
ed (“Worried Devil Blues,” 1934), can 
be heard yodeling on record.19
Folkloric characters also cut across racial lines. i n his book Country, Nick Tosches argues that 
the ballad “Frankie and Johnny,” with a tragic theme common in blues and country, was written by 
a black singer named Mammy 
l
ou. The tale of Casey Jones, recorded by both blues and country 
artists in the 1920s, was also written by an African American, Wallace Saunders. At the same time,  
black musicians were drawn to folk tales of British origin. Tosches refers to a black version of 
 
“Barbara Allen” in which the Scottish lady is a black boy named Boberick Allen. Black 
 
versions 
 
exist of “The Maid Freed from the Gallows,” “
l
ord 
l
ovel,” and “
l
ady 
i
sabel and Elf-
k
night,” three 
more British ballads that traveled to the 
u
nited States in the eighteenth century.20 Blu ES , J A zz, AND  Cou NT ry  43Even when race and hillbilly recordings were segregated in 
record company catalogues in the 1920s and 1930s, anomalies were 
not uncommon and cross-pollination was routine. While most black 
jazz bands were listed in the race catalogues of record labels, those 
with more polished, orchestrated arrangements were often issued alongside white dance orchestras. As sidemen for countless blues singers, Fletcher Henderson and his musicians made numerous records for the more limited race market, but his jazz band’s recordings competed favorably with the most popular white dance orchestras in the mainstream market, including Paul Whiteman’s. Papa Charlie Jackson was marketed as a blues singer, yet his most memorable recording was “Salty Dog Blues,” which became a standard in the country repertoire. Concludes Wald, “[
i
]f our usual views of 
music history were not so deeply colored by race, Jackson might be considered a pioneering 
‘hillbilly’ performer as much as a blues singer.”21 one of the white acts that recorded a version 
of “Salty Dog Blues” for Columbia’s hillbilly series was the Allen Brothers. For their second 
outing, which paired “Chattanooga Blues” and “
l
aughin’ and Cryin’ Blues,” however, someone 
in Columbia’s New 
y
ork office thought the duo was black and listed them in the 14000 race 
series. Whether they were personally offended or simply troubled that the mistake could affect 
their bookings on the segregated white vaudeville circuit, the Allens sued Columbia and even-tually left the label. Because racial separation has been so prominent in 
u
.S. social relations, 
the histories of blues, jazz, and country have often treated these styles as separate and distinct, using designations such as race and hillbilly to stress difference.
Race Music: The Popular Sounds of Black America
once one understands that genres in popular music are more often marketing categories 
than musical distinctions, one is less surprised at just how arbitrary designations like blues  
and jazz can be. New 
o
rleans jazz incorporated blues and ragtime. The blues queens of 
the 1920s regularly performed with jazz bands. Countless jazz tunes have the word blues in 
their titles. 
r
ecord companies fostered distinctions between one genre and another to create 
a sense of diversity among what might otherwise have seemed homogeneous product, and because it was a mechanism that allowed them to more effectively target specific audiences with the music they promoted. 
o
nce established, though, genres such as blues, jazz, and 
country, and others that would develop, generated meanings beyond their strictly commer-cial function and became a means through which audiences came to identify with the music they consumed.
22
The Birth of the Blues
Although all of what is now called blues was categorized as race music in the 1920s and 1930s, 
many historians have distinguished between country blues  (also referred to as down home or 
 rural blues) and city, or classic,  blues (also known as urban blues or vaudeville blues). “Classic blues  
was entertainment,” Amiri Baraka (a.k.a 
l
eroi Jones) has said, “and country blues, folklore,” Even when race and hillbilly record-
ings were segregated in record com-
pany catalogues in the 1920s and 
1930s, anomalies were not uncommon 
and cross-pollination was routine.44 ro C ki N ’ ou Talthough the two styles were more interdependent than such an opposition would suggest.23 
Country blues was intensely personal, highly improvised, and quite irregular in form. 
i
t was 
usually performed by a single male vocalist with guitar accompaniment. 
i
n the cities, the myr -
iad of blues styles were codified into eight- and sixteen-bar patterns, as well as the twelve-bar 
form that became the standard for classic blues. Classic blues follows a 
i
-
i
V-V (tonic, subdomi-
nant, dominant) chord progression and is constructed so that each verse of the aab rhyme scheme leaves space for a vocal or instrumental response. 
i
n this call-and-response pattern 
there is considerable room for improvisation, but within a standardized musical framework. This is the structure that came to dominate the blues in the 1920s and 1930s—albeit with some significant exceptions—and is the structure upon which a good deal of rhythm and blues and rock ‘n’ roll was built.
Despite a rash of so-called blues recordings by white entertainers in the 1910s, it wasn’t 
until 1920—and then quite by accident—that recording companies “discovered” a significant 
African American market for classic blues recordings by black artists. When a recording ses -
sion with the popular white artist Sophie Tucker had to be canceled, the enterprising black producer and songwriter Perry Bradford convinced 
ok
eh executives to let him record a black 
contralto named Mamie Smith. Smith’s recording of Bradford’s “Crazy Blues” sold 8,000 cop-ies a week, mostly to black buyers, and the singer was propelled toward a level of stardom unprecedented among black female performers.
24 okeh thus became the first beneficiary of a 
large, previously untapped market of African American consumers. 
r
alph Peer, the presiding 
ok
eh recording director, dubbed these recordings “race records.”25 The label remained the des-
ignation for black music by black artists for a black audience until 1949.
Smith’s overwhelming success ushered in an era of classic blues recordings made almost 
invariably by African American women: 
i
da Cox, Chippie Hill, Sarah Martin, Clara Smith, 
Trixie Smith, Victoria Spivey, Ethel Waters, and Sippie Wallace, among others. Taking their 
cue from the style of Gertrude (Ma) 
r
ainey, called Mother of the Blues, these women formed 
“the link between the earlier, less polished blues styles and the smoother theatrical style of the later urban blues singers.”
26 All were veterans of traveling tent shows and later the black-
oriented Theater 
o
wners Booking Association (T
o
BA) theater circuit. 
i
n contrast to (usu-
ally male) country blues singers, these classic blues women were 
typically accompanied by “a red hot jazz band” or a “scintillating 
master of the keyboard.”27 As a group, they projected a polish hith-
erto unknown in the blues. The bulk of their material—“upwards 
of seventy-five percent” according to one estimate—was sung from 
the point of view of women.28
Easily the most famous classic blues singer of her time was Bessie Smith, the Empress of 
the Blues. A protégé of Ma 
r
ainey, she spent years on the road perfecting her craft. Her sing-
ing style “combined the emotional fervor of country blues with the vigorous appeal of jazz.”29 
Eventually, she developed her own 
l
iberty Belles revue and became a vaudeville headliner with 
her own show, Harlem Frolics. Smith performed with some of the best jazz bands of the era, 
including 
l
ouis Armstrong’s and Fletcher Henderson’s. Signed to a failing Columbia in 1923, 
she recorded scores of sides over the next decade. Her records sold so well—her “Downhearted 
Blues” (1923), for example, reportedly sold 780,000 copies in six months—that she was said SEE MORE
Blues documentary 
on MySearchLab
In contrast to (usually male) coun-
try blues singers, these classic blues 
women were typically accompanied by 
“a red hot jazz band” or a “scintillating 
master of the keyboard.” Blu ES , J A zz, AND  Cou NT ry  45
The first recordings of classic, urban blues were made in 1920, when 
vaudeville singer/songwriter Perry “Mule” Bradford convinced the OKeh 
label to record Mamie Smith. She was the star of a musical revue called 
Maid of Harlem, in which she sang some of his tunes. Bradford backed 
up Smith with a band, the Jazz Hounds. The result was “Crazy Blues,” a blockbuster hit, which demonstrated that the African American listening audience was an untapped market for the recording industry. This inspired 
OKeh (and other labels) to produce more recordings of African American art-
ists, which were called race records.
Mamie Smith’s singing style owed much to popular theater and vaudeville, and lacked some of the “down-home” 
quality that later blues queens such as Bessie Smith would exhibit. Mamie was a star of the black theatrical circuits that grew in the 1910s and 1920s, where the classic blues strain was most widely publicized. Her stage show with the Jazz Hounds was a theatrical extravaganza and incorporated dance, humorous skits, and other nonmusical entertainment.
Musical Style Notes
A blues song generally consists of a certain number of measures, or bars (see sidebar). Each verse of the song generally 
contains this same number of measures. There are sixteen-bar blues, eight-bar blues, and—the most common—twelve-bar blues. “Crazy Blues” is in fact a “crazy blues,” with the verses alternating between a sixteen-bar and a twelve-bar 
structure (see Musical Road Map below) in an unpredictable pattern.
As the name of Smith’s band suggests, the instrumentation (cornet, trombone, violin, piano) is much more com-
monly associated with jazz, and the style of simultaneous improvisation employed by the players gives the piece a rag-
time feel that places the piece squarely in the late 1910s and early 1920s.
Music Terminology Demystified: What Is a Bar?
Most types of Western music feature a repeated succession of rhythmic pulses, or beats. By placing emphasis on certain 
beats in a recurrent pattern, we can group these beats into rhythmic units. There can be units of two (like a march), three (like a waltz), four (like many rock and blues styles), or even more. One of these rhythmic units is called a measure or, in 
idiomatic American music terminology, a bar.
Musical “Road Map”“Crazy Blues”
Artist:
 
Mamie Smith  
(1883–1946)
Music/Lyrics: Perry BradfordLabel:
 
OKeh (1920)
Listening Guide 2
TIMINGS COMMENTS
0:0–0:09
 Introduction (4 bars)
Instrumental entrance, featuring simultaneous improvisation and sliding instrumental attacks 
characteristic of a ragtime style.
0:10–0:45 First verse (16 bars)
Notice the way in which the trombone “walks” the bass notes 
 
(descending down the musical 
scale in stepwise motion), both during the verse and in playing transitions from one verse to 
another.
0:46–1:13 Second verse (12 bars)
1:14–1:48 Third verse (16 bars)
1:49–2:15
 Fourth verse (12 bars)Notice how the bass instruments begin to double the singer’s melody at the beginning of this 
verse.
2:16–2:40 Fifth verse (12 bars)
2:41–3:13 Sixth verse (16 bars)
3:14 Tag at the end46 ro C ki N ’ ou TThe flamboyant and talented Bessie Smith rose to the pinnacle of 
classic blues success during the 1920s. Her career crashed along with the stock market at the end of the decade.
to have saved the company from bankruptcy. o ne 
of the high points of her career was the starring 
role in the 1929 film St. Louis Blues, based on the 
W . C. Handy composition of the same name. That 
same year she recorded “Nobody 
k
nows 
y
ou When 
y
ou’re Down and 
o
ut,” her last big hit before the 
Great Depression wrecked her career.
The initial success of various blues record-
ings encouraged the formation of a handful of black-
owned, independent labels such as Black Swan, Sunshine, Merritt, and Black Patti. Harry Pace, W .  C. Handy’s partner in the Pace & Handy Pub -
lishing Company, started Black Swan in 1921 and 
through it pursued an explicit policy of racial uplift that won the support of W . E. B. Du Bois and other black social and intellectual leaders.
30 Mayo “ i nk” 
Williams, head of the race series for Paramount (a 
company owned by the Wisconsin Chair Company, 
which entered the record business to sell phonographs), formed his own company, Black Patti, in 
1927. However, because these companies lacked sufficient resources for national promotion and distribution, they were either bought up by the major labels or forced out of the industry. Not a single black-owned label survived the 1920s intact.
Following the initial surge of classic blues recordings, record companies began to test the 
boundaries of the African American market and discovered a considerable demand for coun-try blues. Venturing south to record local singers, they became the unwitting folklorists of 
u
.S. culture. 
i
n 1924, Paramount began country blues recordings under the direction of 
i
nk 
 
Williams. 
i
ts first release was Papa Charlie Jackson’s “
l
awdy 
l
awdy Blues,” followed by releases 
from Arthur “Blind” Blake and Blind 
l
emon Jefferson, perhaps the most popular country blues 
singer of the decade. A native of Wortham, Texas, Jefferson was born blind but with a gift for 
music. While he led a chaotic and dissolute life as an itinerant bluesman, his style influenced almost every country blues artist of the 1920s. Jefferson made seventy-nine recordings for 
 
Paramount in four years, including “Black Snake Blues.” His “Match Box Blues” was covered by rockers from Carl Perkins to the Beatles. As Charters has noted, many of his recordings “were direct reworkings of old field cries and work songs. He shouted the melody in a long, free rhythmic pattern, and the guitar sang behind the voice in a subtle counterpoint.”
31
Throughout the 1920s and 1930s, ok eh,  Columbia, Victor, and Vocalion (a small, in -
dependent label) engaged in extensive field recording, documenting a crucial period in the  Blu ES , J A zz, AND  Cou NT ry  47development of African American music. The person most associated with commercial field 
recordings was 
r
alph Peer, who had coined the term race records at 
ok
eh. 
i
n the 1930s, the 
l
ibrary of Congress began field recording through the efforts of John 
l
omax and his son Alan. 
As a result of all these forays, commercial and noncommercial, dozens of country blues art-
ists—among them Skip James, Mississippi John Hurt, Sleepy John Estes, Blind Willie McTell, Son House, Charlie Patton, 
l
ead Belly, and 
r
obert Johnson—were brought to wider public 
attention.
r
obert Johnson, later to be known as the 
k
ing of the Delta Blues Singers, led a life 
shrouded in myth and mystery. Even after he allegedly sold his soul to the devil to enhance his talent and career, he remained a relatively minor player on the blues stage of his time. His entire recorded output comprised 29 songs (plus alternate takes) made in two sessions in 1936 and 1937. For anyone who was listening, it revealed the genius of his ability to “sing and play 
cross-rhythms on the guitar, relating the parts in . . . complex syncopations.”
32 Still, it wasn’t 
until Columbia released King of the Delta Blues Singers (1961), a compilation of Johnson’s re-
cordings, that British rockers discovered and popularized his material and Johnson became the 
towering blues figure that he is remembered as today. Notable rockers including the 
r
olling 
Stones, Bob Dylan, and 
l
ed 
z
eppelin have covered his material, while Eric Clapton has espe-
cially claimed Johnson’s influence, his inspired vocal and guitar work having made Cream’s live 
version of Johnson’s “Crossroads” one of the standout blues recordings of the rock era.33
The formative influence of blues artists on rock ‘n’ roll has been undeniable. Their di-
verse, idiosyncratic styles ultimately evolved into a more classic mold with standardized struc-
tures, tunes, and even guitar breaks. The pioneering guitar work of Blind 
l
emon Jefferson and 
r
obert Johnson is echoed in the playing of 
l
ightnin’ Hopkins, Aaron “T-Bone” Walker, Muddy 
Waters, and B. B. 
k
ing. 
i
t is fitting that Ma 
r
ainey, Bessie Smith, 
l
ead Belly, 
r
obert Johnson, 
and Howlin’ Wolf have been inducted into the 
r
ock ‘n’ 
r
oll Hall of Fame as “early influences.” 
B. B. 
k
ing, John 
l
ee Hooker, and Muddy Waters have been admitted as rock ‘n’ roll artists in 
their own right.
All That Jazz
The New o rleans fusion of blues, ragtime, and brass band marches, characterized by ensemble 
playing, improvised solos, and syncopated rhythms that began with Buddy Bolden at the turn of  
the century, was certainly a defining moment in the history of jazz. 
i
n 1907 or 1908, a group 
of New 
o
rleans musicians led by bassist Bill Johnson made its way to California. Members 
of this ensemble, joined by others including cornetist Freddie 
k
eppard, formed the 
o
riginal 
Creole Band in 1914, in which guise they toured the country from 
New 
y
ork to 
l
os Angeles, spreading the New 
o
rleans style across 
the nation.34 From hot instrumentalists like Joe “ k ing” o liver and 
l
ouis “Satchmo” Armstrong to composer/pianists like Jelly 
r
oll 
Morton, one major point to be made is that these musicians were 
playing the music that people danced to. Well before jazz became 
the accepted term for such music, bands all over the country were playing some brand of syncopated dance music. The music spread The New Orleans fusion of blues, 
ragtime, and brass band marches, 
characterized by ensemble playing, 
improvised solos, and syncopated 
rhythms that began with Buddy Bolden at the turn of the century, was 
 
certainly a defining moment in the 
 
history of jazz.48 ro C ki N ’ ou Tthat much quicker because depressed economic conditions in the South encouraged people to 
migrate north from World War 
i
 on. 
i
n the case of New 
o
rleans musicians, they left because in 
1917 the Department of the Navy shuttered Storyville, the red light district that had served as 
the music’s birthing center.
Chicago became a primary destination for New 
o
rleans musicians. 
k
ing 
o
liver 
made his way there in 1918 and by 1920, he had taken over the Creole Jazz Band from 
Bill 
 
Johnson. 
l
ess than two years later, he sent for his protégé, 
l
ouis Armstrong, to join 
the band. 
 o
liver’s 
 
journey to Chicago was preceded by two white New 
o
rleans dance bands. 
Tom Brown’s 
 
Dixieland Jas Band had taken up residency in Chicago in 1915, and in 1916, 
Nick 
l
a
r
occa’s 
o
riginal Dixieland Jass Band (
o
DJB) had its first national booking in the city. 
o
DJB then headed for New 
y
ork, where they made the first jazz recordings of “
l
ivery Stable 
Blues” and “The Dixieland Jass Band 
o
ne-Step,” which turned them (and, perhaps, the term 
jazz itself) into a national sensation.
By the early 1920s, New 
y
ork was becoming more prominent as a center for jazz. 
o
ne 
musician who was pivotal to early New 
y
ork jazz is Fletcher Henderson. Henderson inher-
ited the mantle of large ensembles, unorthodox instrumentation, and precise arrangements 
from James 
r
eese Europe. When his jazz orchestra grew to sixteen players for an extended 
stay at the 
r
oseland Ballroom beginning in 1924, Henderson was credited with inaugurating 
the “big band” era of jazz. During the course of Henderson’s engagement at 
r
oseland, 
l
ouis 
 
Armstrong relocated from Chicago to join his ensemble, exerting a deep influence on New 
y
ork jazz players with his growingly sophisticated approach to solo improvisation and strong 
sense of swing drawn from his New 
o
rleans background.
Working as the recording manager for Harry Pace’s Black Swan label, Henderson toured 
with Ethel Waters and gained a working familiarity with the blues. He was the first black jazz 
musician to combine composing, arranging, and performing with an unmatched recording ca-reer. 
i
n addition to the countless blues recordings he made as a sideman for Black Swan, Fletcher 
Henderson and His 
o
rchestra made approximately 100 recordings for various labels from 1923 
to1924, including “Copenhagen” and “
k
ing Porter Stomp,” placing him on a par with the most 
prolific white orchestras of the day. While his blues recordings were issued as race records, the record companies directed his orchestra’s material toward a crossover audience that included white enthusiasts like those who comprised the audience at the 
r
oseland Ballroom.
When 
k
ing 
o
liver turned down a 1927 invitation to appear at the recently opened 
Cotton Club in Harlem, the offer was accepted by an up-and-coming bandleader/pianist from Washington, D.C., Edward 
k
ennedy “Duke” Ellington. Ellington’s unique style incor-
porated everything from the exuberance of New 
o
rleans to the sweet jazz of the white soci-
ety orchestras. The growling trumpet solos of Bubber Miley provided Ellington’s band with its fabled “jungle sound,” which can be heard on “East St. 
l
ouis Toodle-oo” and “Black and 
Tan Fantasy.” Ellington’s piano playing was influenced by the Harlem “stride” pianists such as James P . Johnson, Willie-the-
l
ion Smith, 
l
uckey 
r
oberts, and Fats Waller, who also influ-
enced the piano styles of early rock ‘n’ roll artists such as Fats Domino, 
l
ittle 
r
ichard, Huey 
“Piano” Smith, and Jerry 
l
ee 
l
ewis. Above all, Ellington’s talent as a composer and arranger 
won him widespread acclaim. According to Eileen Southern, “[H]is genius led him to cre-ate an orchestra style marked by rich and daring harmonies, by subtle contrastings of color  Blu ES , J A zz, AND  Cou NT ry  49and timbres, and by an ingenious handling of solo and ensemble relationships.”35 He not only 
developed his arrangements collectively with the band, he also envisioned parts for specific 
players, rather than just particular instruments. 
o
ver the course of his career, he composed 
and/or arranged more than 2,000 songs, many of which live on as jazz classics, from “Black 
and Tan Fantasy” and “
i
’m Beginning to See the 
l
ight” to “Satin Doll” and (with co-composer 
Billy Strayhorn) “Take the ‘A’ Train.”
i
f Fletcher Henderson’s arrangements sometimes felt stiff or awkward, the Ellington 
band was said to “swing.” 
i
n 1932, the Duke wrote “
i
t Don’t Mean a Thing, 
i
f 
i
t Ain’t Got 
That Swing,” giving a name to the jazz era that followed. Although regular national radio broadcasts from the Cotton Club turned the Ellington band into a household name, swing came to be associated with the white dance bands of Tommy and Jimmy Dorsey, Artie Shaw, Glenn Miller, and Benny Goodman. Goodman in particular could swing more than most; he 
hired Fletcher Henderson, among other African Americans, as his arranger, and he made jazz history when he added black pianist Teddy Wilson to his band in 1936.
Next to Ellington’s, the most prominent black-led band of the swing era was the 
Count Basie 
o
rchestra. Whereas Ellington’s sophistication prefigured jazz’s move in the 
direction of art music, Basie’s band remained committed to the dance orientation that paved the way for rhythm and blues and rock ‘n’ roll. A native of New Jersey, in 1927 Basie settled in 
k
ansas City, a regular stopping place for touring musicians due to its being a major junc-
tion for rail and riverboat traffic. By 1935, after a stint with the Benny Moten band, Basie SEE MORE
Duke Ellington 
documentary on MySearchLabThe Count Basie orchestra maintained a connection to the blues as they helped chart the course 
for jazz.
50 ro C ki N ’ ou Twas fronting his own band, broadcasting from the r eno Club, and 
participating with his bandmates in the city’s competitive jam 
sessions where the twelve-bar blues provided the flexible frame-
work for extended improvisation.36 The Basie band carried this 
sense of excitement forward in material such as “Boogie Woogie,” 
“
o
ne 
o
’Clock Jump,” and “ Jumpin’ at the Woodside.” 
i
n addition, 
Jo Jones’s propulsive drumming foreshadowed the rhythms that 
would come to dominate rhythm and blues. 
i
t is not surprising, then, that two of the vocal-
ists who performed with the Basie 
o
rchestra, 
k
ansas City blues shouters Jimmy 
r
ushing 
and Big Joe Turner, blurred the line between jazz and blues and maintained vibrant careers 
through the ascendancy of rhythm and blues, even after the heyday of the big bands.
Hillbilly: The Music of the White Working Class
The first recordings of country musicians were as accidental as the classic blues and, once 
again, it was 
r
alph Peer who opened the market for the music. 
i
n 1923, when Peer visited 
Atlanta in search of new black artists, Polk Brockman persuaded him to record a man who 
had been a mainstay of the North Georgia folk scene for forty years, Fiddlin’ John Carson. 
Although Carson had won the Atlanta 
o
ld Time Fiddler’s Convention numerous times, Peer 
was unimpressed with his “
l
ittle 
o
ld 
l
og Cabin in the 
l
ane” and “The 
o
ld Hen Cackled and 
the 
r
ooster’s Going to Crow.” The recordings’ sales figures were what convinced Peer of the 
music’s value.37
At the time, this music was never referred to as country music. r ecord catalogues used 
labels such as “old time music” (
ok
eh), “old familiar tunes” (Columbia), and “songs from Dixie” 
(Brunswick).38 The word hillbilly had been used since the turn of the century as a catchall (and 
pejorative) term for Southern backwoods culture. 
i
n 1925, a string band headed by Al Hopkins 
recorded six songs for 
r
alph Peer. Asked the group’s name, Hopkins responded: “Call the band 
anything you want. We are nothing but a bunch of hillbillies from North Carolina and Virginia anyway.”
39 Peer listed the band as the “Hill Billies”—which soon became the generic term for 
commercial country music. Just like the term race music, it was laden with contradictory mean-
ings. According to Bill C. Malone, “
l
ike the South itself, hillbilly music suffered and profited 
from a conflicting set of images held by Americans that ranged from stability and enchantment to decadence and cultural degeneracy.”
40 For many, “hillbilly music” was a sign of the South’s 
backward character, inseparable from sharecropping, racial violence, and religious bigotry. 
o
thers, however, valued the South and its music precisely for its retention of traditional values 
in a time of bewildering change.
i
n the early period of commercial country music, white string bands like the Hill Billies pre -
dominated. Among the finest were Charlie Poole and his North Carolina 
r
amblers and Gid 
Tanner’s Skillet 
l
ickers. At first, these bands’ repertoires consisted of traditional, anony-
mous folk tunes, surprisingly few of which were of British origin.41 Then professional song -
writers began to appear. By the time the Skillet 
l
ickers started recording for Columbia 
in 1926, their selections included “everything from traditional ballads, breakdowns, and Whereas Ellington’s sophistication 
prefigured jazz’s move in the direction 
of art music, Basie’s band remained 
committed to the dance orientation 
that paved the way for rhythm and blues and rock ‘n’ roll. Blu ES , J A zz, AND  Cou NT ry  51rural ‘dramas’ (humorous skits) to the latest popular hits from Tin Pan Alley.”42 A number 
of interracial string bands also recorded hillbilly music, such as the 
k
entucky Boys and the 
Georgia 
y
ellowhammers, both of which used black fiddlers. All-black string bands like the 
Mississippi Sheiks could handle country material as well as anyone, but the record compa -
nies pushed them toward their blues repertoire in the studio.43 These artists drew on a broad 
range of sources that they incorporated into regional styles that were intensely familiar to 
their audiences.
Most early commercial performers were working people who played music in their off-
hours. A few, like Charlie Poole, toured regularly on the vaudeville circuit, but it was rare for 
a hillbilly performer to have a show business career that paid the rent.44 one such performer, 
Vernon Dalhart, entered the business via vaudeville and light opera. A graduate of the Dallas 
Conservatory of Music, Dalhart began recording for Edison in 1916, specializing in so-called 
coon songs. 
i
n 1924, Victor recorded his “Wreck of the 
o
ld 97” and “The Prisoner’s Song,” the 
first country music recordings to sell in the millions. By 1933, when his career ended, he had 
sold an estimated 75 million records.
i
n 1927, two of country music’s most influential acts—Jimmie 
r
odgers and the Carter 
Family—were first recorded within days of each other at a landmark set of recording sessions overseen in Bristol, Tennessee, by the tireless 
r
alph Peer, now at Victor. 
r
odgers represented 
the archetypal “ramblin’ man”; the Carter Family projected stability. (These two polar—and equally marketable—images were well represented among country musicians for years to come.) While 
r
odgers roamed through vaudeville and the blues, the Carter Family explored 
the traditional folkloric component of country music. Any number of their songs, including 
“Wildwood Flower” and “Will the Circle Be 
u
nbroken,” have become country music classics, 
but they exerted relatively less influence on the future of pop. That’s where Jimmie 
r
odgers 
came in.The Carter Family represented “family 
values” in country music even after Sara and A. P . divorced. Their traditional 
image corresponded with the treasure 
trove of traditional songs they helped to preserve.
52 ro C ki N ’ ou TJimmie r odgers, the “Singing Brakeman,” was the first real star of country music. As 
a boy accompanying his father, a rail crew foreman, he learned the language and culture of 
the railroad men he would later immortalize in song. 
i
n 1925, he joined a minstrel troupe and 
toured the South and Midwest as a blackface entertainer. After his Bristol recording debut, 
Victor executives invited 
r
odgers to their New Jersey studios, where he recorded the first of 
his twelve blue yodels, so-called because they incorporated yodeling into the blues. Popularly 
known as “T for Texas,” this recording took the country by storm and became 
r
odgers’s only 
million seller. Though he usually performed solo, 
r
odgers featured a broad range of players 
and instruments in his recordings, including ukuleles and pianos, as well as brass and the one instrument that became a defining characteristic of certain strains of country music—the 
steel guitar. His steel guitarists included Joe 
k
aipo, a Hawaiian, 
and he recorded with the (black) 
l
ouisville Jug Band. 
o
n “Blue 
 y
odel No. 9,” 
r
odgers was joined by 
l
ouis Armstrong on trumpet 
and Armstrong’s wife, 
l
il, on piano. 
r
odgers’s blue yodels show-
cased the cultural diversity that informed his music and influenced 
generations of musicians. 
l
ike some of his blues contemporaries, 
r
odgers was inducted as an early influence into the 
r
ock ‘n’ 
r
oll 
Hall of Fame.
r
odgers’s influence on country music was incalculable. Following his success, groups 
like 
r
oy Hall’s Blue 
r
idge Entertainers and 
r
oy Acuff ’s Smoky Mountain Boys established 
the steel guitar as a staple in country music. With the rise of Texas hillbillies such as Ernest Tubb, 
l
efty Frizzell, and Bob Wills, all inspired by 
r
odgers, country music took a turn to the 
west, especially benefiting Gene Autry, the Singing Cowboy, who began his career as a Jimmie 
r
odgers imitator. Bob Wills and His Texas Playboys, however, popularized a brand of music HEAR MORE
Jimmie Rodgers on 
MySearchLabJimmie Rodgers, known as “the Singing Brakeman” 
because of his time spent riding the rails, repre-sented the archetypal “ramblin’ man” in country 
music.
Rodgers’s blue yodels showcased the 
cultural diversity that informed his 
music and influenced generations of 
musicians. Like some of his blues con-
temporaries, Rodgers was inducted as an early influence into the Rock ‘n’ Roll Hall of Fame. Blu ES , J A zz, AND  Cou NT ry  53
If you were searching for one artist who incorporated the widest range 
of American roots music in the early twentieth century, you couldn’t go 
wrong with Jimmie Rodgers. While considered the first true country music 
star, Rodgers’s songs incorporated blues, country, jazz, and even Hawaiian 
guitar. Rodgers wrote twelve blues–country hybrid songs known as “blue yodels.” Blue Yodel #9, recorded on September 11, 1931, is listed as 
 
number 23 in the Rock ‘n’ Roll Hall of Fame’s “500 Songs That Shaped 
Rock and Roll.”
Musical Style Notes
“Blue Yodel #9” is a blues song with elements of country and jazz. The song features typical blues chord progressions 
but an irregular form. It’s basically an eight-bar blues (eight bars of four beats each), but Rodgers adds some two-beat bars here and there, and not all the verses have exactly the same structure. (At 1:07 and 1:16, you can hear the pianist 
changing chords quickly; she is concentrating intensely on following Rodgers as he varies the eight-bar form.) Each verse 
also ends with Rodgers’s signature yodel, which gives this blues song a country twist. To further add to the stylistic mix, the song features the New Orleans–style improvisations of jazz trumpeter Louis Armstrong; the pianist is his wife Lillian Armstrong.
Musical “Road Map”
TIMINGS COMMENTS
0:00–0:14 Introduction; trumpet and piano
0:14–0:32 Verse 1
0:32–0:53
@0:47Verse 2Trademark yodel at 0:47
0:53–1:01 Verse 3
1:01–1:06 (Brief trumpet interlude between verses)
1:07–1:271:22Verse 4Yodel at 1:22, leading into instrumental solo
1:27–1:54 Instrumental verse; trumpet solos
1:54–2:11 Verse 5
2:11–2:27
2:27–2:37Verse 6Yodel, leading into final trumpet phrase(Notice this is the first time you can really hear the guitar—the  
slow strum right at the end!)“Blue Yodel #9  
(Standin’ on the Corner)”
Artist:
 
Jimmie Rodgers
Music/Lyrics: Jimmie Rodgers
Label:
 
RCA Victor (1931)
Listening Guide 354 ro C ki N ’ ou Tcalled western swing, which became a formative influence on early rock ‘n’ roll. An unortho-
dox bandleader with eclectic taste in music, Wills and his group performed daily on 
k
V
oo
 in 
Tulsa, 
o
klahoma, from 1934 to 1942. 
i
n its various incarnations, the Texas Playboys included 
brass, reeds, drums, and electric guitars, bearing a strong blues and jazz influence. 
i
n 1940, 
Wills’s “New San Antonio 
r
ose” became a certified million seller for the group and a national 
sensation when Bing Crosby recorded it the following year.
Neither 
r
odgers nor the Carter Family toured extensively—the Carters because of their 
complicated family dynamics, which included separation and divorce, 
r
odgers due to a running 
battle with tuberculosis, which eventually took his life. Their careers were propelled in large 
measure by their recordings and radio appearances. Although radio had devastating effects on the recording industry as a whole, early country musicians seem to have benefited from a complementary relationship between radio appearances and record sales.
Disseminating Blues, Jazz, and Country:  
More Separate than Equal
While significant markets existed for jazz and blues records, African American artists rarely 
performed on radio or in film. Following Bessie Smith’s starring role in St. Louis Blues in 1929, 
the film’s director, Dudley Murphy, made Black and Tan Fantasy, a movie built around Duke 
Ellington’s composition.  
i
n 1933, Murphy filmed an operatic version of Eugene 
o
’Neill’s 
 Emperor Jones with the incomparable Paul 
r
obeson in the title role. But the Great Depression 
shut most independent black-oriented films out of the business, leaving Hollywood firmly in 
control—and Hollywood seldom cast African Americans in anything but subservient and/or degrading roles.
The situation was even worse on radio. The blues—particularly country blues—were 
seldom heard on the airwaves. “
r
adio broadcasts,” as Nelson George has noted, “were rarely 
used to promote the grittier forms of music.”45 in 1932, however, Fats Waller played a se-
ries titled Fats Waller’s Rhythm Club on W
l
W in Cincinnati, 
o
hio. A decade later in Helena, 
Arkansas, blues singer and harmonica player Sonny Boy Williamson (
r
ice Miller), accom-
panied by guitarist 
r
obert 
l
ockwood, appeared on the 
k
ing Biscuit Flour Company’s King 
Biscuit Time. Network radio made a few short-lived attempts to feature well-known African Americans. The Ethel Waters Show, sponsored by Amoco on NBC, was quickly canceled when the network’s Southern affiliates threatened to boycott the program. Fleischmann 
y
east 
sponsored the Louis Armstrong Show on CBS in 1937, but scheduled opposite NBC’s popular Jack Benny Show, the program lasted only thirteen weeks. African American jazz bands were usually relegated to late-night broadcasts from popular nightspots—Duke Ellington at the 
Cotton Club, Chick Webb at the Savoy in Harlem, Earl (Fatha) Hines from Chicago’s Grand Terrace. As Nelson George has 
written, “Significantly, these broadcasts weren’t aimed at blacks. Broadcasters and advertisers were simply meeting America’s de-mand for big-band music. These bands just happened to be black and popular.”
46African American jazz bands were usu-
ally relegated to late-night broadcasts 
from popular nightspots—Duke Ellington 
at the Cotton Club, Chick Webb at the 
Savoy in Harlem, Earl (Fatha) Hines from Chicago’s Grand Terrace. Blu ES , J A zz, AND  Cou NT ry  55occasionally, an extremely talented African American musician, like William Grant Still, 
could find work in radio as a composer or arranger. Still had studied at the New England 
Conservatory as well as with avant-garde composer Edgar Varèse. At one point, he worked at  
W . C. Handy’s publishing house and at the Black Swan record company; during the Great 
 
Depression, he worked as an arranger and staff composer at both WCBS and WNBC in New 
y
ork. He received commissions from Artie Shaw, Sophie Tucker, and Paul Whiteman, among 
others, and became the first African American conductor of a white radio orchestra. The 
 
employment of African Americans in radio, however, was contingent on their ability to relate 
to European conventions and mainstream tastes.
i
n contrast, broadcasters and film producers gave country music a considerable boost. 
Since the dawn of commercial radio in the early twenties, stations throughout the South and Midwest had broadcast country music. The barn dance format quickly became the most pop-
ular showcase for country talent. The first such program of note was National Barn Dance, introduced in 1924 by the Sears 
r
oebuck station, W
l
S in Chicago. Combining country and 
folk material with older pop standards, the program had a broader appeal than most country-oriented shows.
Eventually, the Grand Ole Opry overshadowed all other country broadcasts. 
i
t was the 
brainchild of George D. Hay, a columnist for the Memphis Commercial Appeal and a veteran an-nouncer on W
l
S. 
i
n 1925, Hay became the station manager for WSM in Nashville, owned by 
the National 
l
ife and Accident 
i
nsurance Company. Bypassing the cultural biases of the station 
owners and the Nashville elite, Hay launched Barn Dance, later renamed the Grand Ole Opry. 
i
ts 
first major singing star was 
u
ncle Dave Macon, a gifted and unpretentious banjo player with a 
vast storehouse of folkloric material. The program also introduced one of the first black stars 
of country music (and radio), Deford Bailey, a country harmonica player who proved to be one 
of the show’s most popular artists. The early Opry’s biggest star, though, was singer and fid-dler 
r
oy Acuff, who achieved worldwide fame playing music derived from his upbringing on a 
Smoky Mountains tenant farm. Acuff toured with Doc Hauer’s Medicine Show in 1932, hawk-ing Moc-A-Tan Compound in blackface, and later gained recognition on stations W
rol
 and 
WN
o
X in 
k
noxville, Tennessee. His first recording session, in 1936, yielded two of his biggest 
hits, “Great Speckled Bird” and “Wabash Cannonball,” setting the 
stage for his joining the Grand Ole Opry in 1938. Building on the suc-cess of such artists, the Opry eventually became the longest-running show on 
u
.S. radio, a clear indicator of the commercial potential of 
country music.
As country music began to incorporate western themes, radio and film helped to popu-
larize the so-called singing cowboys. Tex 
r
itter, a native of Murvaul, Texas, began singing 
western and mountain songs on 
k
P
r
C in Houston in 1929. He moved to W
or
’s Lone Star 
Rangers in 1932, one of the first western radio shows to originate in New 
y
ork. The Sons of 
the Pioneers—which included 
r
oy 
r
ogers, the 
k
ing of the Cowboys—had an early-morning 
radio program on 
k
FWB in Hollywood. Gene Autry got his start as the 
o
klahoma 
y
odeling 
 
Cowboy on 
k
V
oo
 in Tulsa, 
o
klahoma. Sometime after recording on the Sears Conqueror label,  
Autry landed his own radio show, Conqueror Record Time, on W
l
S, where he became one of the 
most popular entertainers in the station’s history. The singing cowboys were also popularized The Opry eventually became the lon-
gest-running show on U.S. radio, a clear 
indicator of the commercial potential 
of country music.56 ro C ki N ’ ou Tin scores of Hollywood movies. Autry starred in more than 100 cowboy movies, most produced 
by 
r
epublic, which also produced the films of his main rival, 
r
oy 
r
ogers, starting in 1937.
The cowboy image became so prevalent in country music that even performers who did 
not perform western-related material began to dress in garish western-style garb. For a time, 
the term western became an alternative to the hillbilly designation for country music but, as usual, the label obscured the diversity of cultural inputs in the music. As Bill C. Malone has pointed out,
The “western” music which became fashionable in the mid-thirties came from . . . southern tradi-
tional and gospel music, popular music, commercial recordings of all kinds (including blues and jazz), and, crucially, black music. Southwesterners could draw additionally on Mexican, Cajun, German, and what generally was described as “Bohemian” music (that is, the polka-derived styles of people who emigrated to South-Central Texas from what is now Czechoslovakia).
47
Country music would make its contribution to the eruption of rock ‘n’ roll with this kind of 
cultural mixing.
The Long Road Back for Records
The Great Depression decimated the ranks of small independent blues, jazz, and country mu-sic labels, and things were not much rosier for the majors. Paramount had acquired the Black Swan catalogue in 1924 (before the Depression), and Columbia had absorbed 
ok
eh in 1926, 
only to be bought by the American 
r
ecord Company for a mere $70,000 during the Depres-
sion. Edison ceased production in 1930; Warner Brothers acquired Brunswick to promote its 
film stars. 
i
n 1929, David Sarnoff, as vice president of 
r
CA, engineered a merger between 
r
CA 
and Victor records, becoming president of the new company. 
r
CA Victor was one of the only 
record companies still holding its own.
For the record industry, the long road back to prosperity began with a machine that 
had been laid to rest more than two decades earlier—the jukebox. The 1908 nickel-in-the-slot phonograph had quickly fallen into disuse when phonographs and records moved into homes. A new incarnation of the coin-operated record player appeared in 1927, when the Automatic 
Musical 
i
nstrument Company introduced its Selective Phonograph. 
o
nce Prohibition was re-
pealed in 1933, thousands of newly (re)opened bars and cocktail lounges, looking for low-cost entertainment and additional sources of revenue, were happy to consider the jukebox. A num-ber of other companies, including Wurlitzer, 
r
ockola, and Seburg, soon entered the business. 
By 1935, 150,000 jukeboxes operated in the 
u
nited States, account-
ing for 40 percent of the record trade. Jukeboxes included a much broader range of music than most radio stations. As with Your Hit Parade, the jukebox enabled the mass audience to play a powerful role in determining public taste. Following the dramatic growth 
of jukeboxes, Billboard and V ariety, the major entertainment industry trade magazines, began charting jukebox hits. 
o
nce this happened, radio producers used the charts to shape live pro-
gramming, and song-pluggers paid more attention to records.As with Your Hit Parade, the jukebox 
enabled the mass audience to play  
a powerful role in determining  
public taste. Blu ES , J A zz, AND  Cou NT ry  57other technological advances also increased the desirability of records. i n the mid-1920s, 
broadcast technology led to electrical recording, which used microphones, vacuum-tube am -
plifiers, and an electromagnetic cutting stylus to make records. As a result, recording studios 
were better able to accommodate whole orchestras, and the resulting records had markedly 
improved frequency response. By 1925, both Victor and Columbia were issuing electrically recorded discs. But with record sales falling, it did not seem practical to market expensive new electric record players. 
i
n 1932, Ted Wallerstein of 
r
CA Victor solved the cost problem when 
he offered the Duo, Jr.—an electric turntable with no tubes or speakers that could be jacked into a radio—for a list price of $16.50. Then in 1934, the newly created Decca label slashed the price of a record from seventy-five cents to thirty-five cents, contributing not only to its own success but to the revival of the record business as a whole.
After delivering the Duo, Jr. to 
r
CA Victor, Wallerstein prepared to jump ship to CBS. 
u
ntil this time, CBS had been operating without a record division. 
i
n 1938, Wallerstein con-
vinced William Paley to purchase the American 
r
ecord Company, which owned Columbia 
r
ecords, Victor’s main rival, for the seemingly outrageous price of $700,000, ten times its pur-
chase price of a few years earlier. Wallerstein had judged correctly that CBS would benefit 
from acquiring an established trademark, a pressing plant, and the rights to British Colum-bia’s 
u
.S. recordings. Abandoning 
r
CA Victor to become head of the new CBS record division, 
Wallerstein lured talent such as Benny Goodman, Duke Ellington, and Count Basie to the Columbia label.
o
ne of the key players in the talent raids that brought Goodman and Basie to Columbia 
was John Hammond, a wealthy Vanderbilt on his mother’s side, a staunch civil rights activ-ist, and an aficionado of African American music; he was soon to become Benny Goodman’s 
brother-in-law. Hammond had produced Bessie Smith’s final recording session and Billie 
 
Holiday’s first session within months of each other in 1933. 
i
n 1939, he became a full-time 
producer at Columbia; his years at the label spanned generations and influenced the careers 
of artists as diverse as Aretha Franklin, Bob Dylan, and Bruce Springsteen. Hammond was widely respected among African American musicians for his attempts to break down racial  
barriers, although he could also be heavy handed in his judgment about what counted as 
 
“authentic” black jazz.48 it was Hammond who convinced Benny Goodman to add Teddy 
 
Wilson to his band. 
i
n 1938, he produced From Spirituals to Swing, a landmark concert at Carnegie 
Hall showcasing the history of African American music (and repeated this success a year later). 
i
n his autobiography, he argued for a “lessening of differences between country and popular 
music, between folk, rock, jazz, gospel, and other categories.”49 He was clearly more attuned 
than most to the sounds that would eventually transform the character of popular music.
With the advent of commercial radio and talkies after World War I, record companies found their 
sales slipping and they looked for new markets. In the process, they discovered a sizable African American market for blues recordings by black artists as well as an untapped market for so-called hillbilly music. While new labels, such as OKeh, Black Swan, and Black Patti, came into exis-tence, most of these were forced out of business or absorbed by larger companies as record sales 58 ro C ki N ’ ou Tcontinued to fall. Radio remained the focus of home entertainment throughout the Great Depres-
sion, but it provided far more access to pop and country music than to blues, while white jazz art-ists were featured much more prominently than black. It was not until the rebirth of the jukebox, 
which gave the mass audience more of a voice in public taste, that the record companies made 
a real financial comeback. Cheaper records and playback equipment certainly helped grow the consumer market. By the end of the Depression, Columbia, Victor, and Decca had emerged as the big three in recording. Although they faced almost no competition, they saw no harm in protect-ing themselves from the possibility that small new companies would find new grassroots musics. Therefore, each company established a less expensive subsidiary to cover the grassroots. Victor cre-ated Bluebird for its so-called race and hillbilly artists. In 1940, Columbia revitalized OKeh as its specialty label. The more recently formed Decca acquired Gennett, an old-time label, in the late 1930s. By this time, jazz had morphed into swing, the hottest trend in popular music. This, then, 
was the situation as the United States prepared for its entrance into World War II.
LEARN MORE
Chapter Test on 
MySearchLab  59
3
The military buildup that preceded the United States ’ 
entry into World War II greatly enhanced the country’s prospects for 
a complete economic recovery from the Great Depression. The nation’s 
involvement in the war led, in turn, to profound social changes, including 
the successful challenging of policies and practices concerning race and 
gender relations. As the country approached full employment, most citizens’ improved finan-cial status contrasted sharply with the hardship of the Depression. In the cultural arena, these changes and others associated with the war, such as population migrations, material shortages, and technological advances, played major roles in determining the course of popular music.
As the military buildup began, thousands of Southern blacks and whites abandoned the 
oppressive conditions of sharecropping and tenant farming to find better paying jobs else-where. Naturally, they took their music with them. At the same time, countless Eastern and 
Midwestern soldiers were put through basic training on Southern military bases, where they heard musical styles that had not achieved mainstream popularity in the North. In this way, blues and country music received unprecedented exposure. By the early 1940s, hundreds of stations across the United States were broadcasting country music. Detroit jukebox operators reported that country music records were the selections played the most, and in Europe, the Armed Forces Radio Network voted Roy Acuff more popular than Frank Sinatra.
Unlike country music, the blues, as a rule, had been excluded from radio in earlier 
years, but the war-era exodus of over 1 million African Americans from the South helped to loosen these restrictive programming policies. Wartime prosperity made them an identifi-able and desirable consumer group. Gradually, in areas with high concentrations of 
 
African 
 
Americans, some black-oriented programs, usually slotted late at night, appeared on a few 
stations. Such programming began to tear down the walls of the so-called race market  
toward the end of the decade.LEARN MORE
Learning objectives 
on MySearchLab“Good Rockin’  
Tonight”: The Rise  
of Rhythm and Blues60 R ock IN ’ o UTIn the music industry, economic recovery led to bitter and prolonged power struggles 
that revolved around a single question: Who should benefit, and in what proportion, from the 
profits derived from the use and sale of intellectual property? The music business in the 1940s 
had expanded far beyond the legal and organizational machinery that determined how to al-
locate the fruits of the market. The sweeping commodification of 
music that accompanied the development of recording and broad -
casting had created possibilities for financial gain unimaginable prior to the advent of mass culture. Neither the 
c
opyright Act of 
1909 nor the 
c
ommunications Act of 1934 anticipated the com-
plex interrelationships that had now developed among the major 
interests in the music business—writers, publishers, performers, broadcasters, and record com-panies—let alone the relationships between these groups and consumers. As a result, these 
parties often found themselves in the midst of shifting alliances, competing interests, and dra-matic cultural changes.
The Publishers and the Broadcasters:  
Ascap Versus BMI
Publishers and broadcasters had been at odds ever since the American Society of c ompos-
ers, Authors, and Publishers’ (AS
c
AP’s) members made their first demand for a $5-a-day roy -
alty fee in 1922, and radio formed the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB) in reaction. 
Throughout the first two decades of radio broadcasting, the major publishers had complained 
about declining profits . . . all the way to the bank. In the 1930s, according to Russell 
 
Sanjek, 
“ AS
c
AP income from radio, of which the networks paid about 20 percent, had risen from 
$757,450 in 1932 to . . . $4.3 million, in 1939.”1 Representing about two-thirds of AS c AP’s to-
tal income, radio revenues were clearly substantial, and their potential at the start of the 1940s 
was even greater.
As it had before, the prospect of windfall profits brought out the greed in AS
c
AP’s 
1,250 members. AS
c
AP’s fee for a blanket license (permission to broadcast any selection in the 
AS
c
AP catalogue) was 5 percent of the total receipts from all sponsored programs, including 
talk shows and sports broadcasts that did not use music. Such terms naturally exacerbated the 
tension between AS
c
AP and the broadcasters. Their already strained relationship began to 
disintegrate in the summer of 1940, when AS
c
AP mailed out a new contract that would have 
doubled its revenues when the existing contract expired on December 31, 1940. Designed to divide the broadcasters, it included a sliding-scale fee that ranged from 3 percent for smaller stations to 7.5 percent for the networks. AS
c
AP’s divide-and-conquer strategy did not work; 
instead, the broadcasters closed ranks.
The year before, the NAB, representing some 600 radio stations, had decided to challenge 
AS
c
AP’s monopoly by forming a performing rights organization of its own. Some 256 stations 
raised close to $1.5 million to capitalize Broadcast Music Incorporated (BMI), launched on 
 o
ctober 13, 1939. “Taking advantage of AS
c
AP’s stringent membership requirements, as well 
as its relative indifference to the popular and folk music being produced outside of New York The sweeping commodification of music 
that accompanied the development  
of recording and broadcasting had 
 
created possibilities for financial gain 
unimaginable prior to the advent of mass culture. “Goo D  Rock IN ’ To NIG h T ”  61and h ollywood,” Nat Shapiro has written, “BMI sought out and acquired its support from the 
‘have not’ publishers and writers in the grassroots areas.”2 Blues and country music songwrit-
ers and publishers found in BMI an inviting home for their work. By the end of 1940, BMI had 
become a sizable operation, registering about thirty songs a month and acquiring a number of 
existing catalogues, including Ralph Peer’s Southern Music Publishing 
c
ompany.3
The broadcasters responded to AS c AP’s demands by boycotting the entire AS c AP cata-
logue. AS
c
AP had assumed that public demand for the likes of Irving Berlin, 
c
ole Porter, and 
George Gershwin would soon bring the NAB back into the fold. But as NAB president Neville 
Miller opined somewhat cynically: “The music the people like is the music people hear. It is 
likely that no one will notice the difference in character and quality of programs on and after January 1, 1941.”
4 For about ten months in 1941, AS c AP music on the radio was replaced by 
authentic regional music and some international styles, supplemented by melodies in the pub-
lic domain. As the broadcasters had predicted, no public protest arose. Some key acquisitions 
by BMI contributed measurably to the boycott’s success. Ralph Peer, now in the international 
market, offered a catalogue of Latin popular music; Roy Acuff and Fred Rose (AS
c
AP members 
since 1928) offered Acuff-Rose Music, the first all-country catalogue; and E. B. Marks, a major 
Tin Pan Alley firm, offered the familiar pop fare required for network broadcasts. Broadcasters and publishers came to terms in 1941, but only after a federally initiated antitrust action forced AS
c
AP into a consent decree regulating its dealings.
At first, BMI came up with few songs of lasting significance. Still, by the end of 1941, 
its catalogue contained 36,000 copyrights from fifty-two publishers.5 What was originally en-
visioned as a throwaway bargaining tool emerged as a valuable source of music and AS
c
AP’s 
primary competition. By the end of the decade, the Tin Pan Alley/Broadway/
h
ollywood mo-
nopoly on public taste was being successfully challenged by BMI writers like 
h
uddie 
 
Ledbetter 
(Lead Belly), 
h
ank Snow, Arthur “Big Boy” 
c
rudup, Roy Brown, Ivory Joe 
h
unter, 
h
ank 
 
Williams, Ernest Tubb, Johnny 
o
tis, Fats Domino, and Wynonie 
h
arris.
Enter the Deejay: The Broadcasters Versus the AFM
Less than a year after the settlement of its dispute with AS c AP , NAB found itself embroiled 
in another controversy, this time with the American Federation of Musicians (AFM). As a 
rule, the music heard on radio was performed live, often in formal concert settings with audi-
ences in attendance. Searching desperately for less expensive programming during the Great 
 Depression, some radio stations had begun to use records as an alternative. Records, however, 
directly challenged the primacy of live music and threatened the continued employment of working musicians on the air.
Records were played by a new figure in broadcasting, the disc jockey, a term that came to 
be defined as a person who was “jockeying or riding a record toward success.”
6 Until the advent 
of the disc jockey, or deejay, radio had simply been a vehicle for transmitting the substance 
of other media—newspapers, religious pulpits, concert halls, vaudeville, and theater. The dee-
jay show was unique in its combination of live announcing and “canned” (prerecorded) music. 
Early deejays appeared even before the stock market crash in 1929. “Doc” Brinkley, the first 62 R ock IN ’ o UTcountry deejay, beamed country music into millions of U.S. homes 
from the 100,000-watt XER in Mexico. The first black deejay, Jack L. 
c
ooper, sold an incredible amount of Tip Top Bread in the 1930s 
while spinning “jump, jam, and jive” records on his pioneering 
show, The Negro Hour, broadcast from WSB
c
 on the south side of 
c
hicago. The first woman deejay on a commercially licensed station 
was Miss 
h
alloween Martin, featured on Marshall Field and 
c
ompany’s Musical Clock, a wake-
up show on 
k
YW in 
c
hicago.
The archetypal deejay show appeared in 1935 when the smooth-talking Martin Block 
began his show Make Believe Ballroom on WNEW in New York. Block, “whose facile tongue 
soon successfully defeated all record hiss or needle noise and made the time between records exciting with spellbinding monologues and irresistible advertising pitches,” copied the concept 
for his program from a Los Angeles deejay, Al Jarvis.
7 Within months, 4 million listeners were 
tuning in to Block’s two-and-a-half-hour daily broadcasts. Focusing systematically on the most 
recent releases, Block and Jarvis introduced the beginnings of formula radio.
As deejays became more common, the practice of programming only live music on ra-
dio became harder to maintain. Indeed, after the formation of 
c
apitol Records by record-store 
owner Glenn Wallichs, songwriter Johnny Mercer, and Paramount Pictures executive Buddy 
De Sylva in 1942, many programs and record companies pushed recorded music. In a 1969 interview, Wallichs recalled the special consideration 
c
apitol Records offered to deejays: “We 
typed special labels with their names on both sides, pressed them on expensive lightweights, unbreakable vinylite compound, and then had our limited employee force drive around and dis-tribute each personally. It was a service that created a sensation. We made the jock a Big Man, an Important Guy, VIP in the industry.”
8
It fell to James c . Petrillo, elected president of the AFM in 1940 after leading the local 
c
hicago branch, to declare war on canned music. Reasoning correctly that records would 
put live radio musicians out of work, Petrillo had tried for years to deal with the problem. 
h
e unsuccessfully lobbied the Roosevelt administration to ban records on radio, and then 
forced 
c
hicago radio stations to employ union musicians to operate turntables. Because nei-
ther musicians nor record companies received royalties from record broadcasts, Petrillo had also convinced record manufacturers to print a warning against airing commercial discs on record labels.
9 In 1940, however, a lower court decision restraining WNEW from broad-
casting Paul Whiteman’s records was reversed on appeal. Judge Learned 
h
and opined that 
“the common-law property of orchestra leader and corporation manufacturing phonograph 
records ended with sale of record, so that radio broadcasting company could not be re-
strained from using records in broadcasts.”10 Nevertheless, Petrillo decided to step up his 
campaign.
Not one to get overly bogged down in legalities or past alliances, Petrillo turned his wrath 
on the record companies in 1942. If no records were produced, Petrillo reasoned, 
 
recorded mu-
sic could not be broadcast. 
h
e warned the record companies that unless they could prevent 
radio stations and jukebox operators from playing records, his organization would strike the recording studios—a strategy intended to hurt record production and, at the same time, keep musicians working on radio. When the record companies did not comply, Petrillo ordered a Until the advent of the disc jockey, or 
deejay, radio had simply been a vehicle 
for transmitting the substance of other 
media—newspapers, religious pulpits, 
concert halls, vaudeville, and theater. “Goo D  Rock IN ’ To NIG h T ”  63ban on recording. No musicians were to enter recording studios in c anada or the United States 
until the AFM’s demands were met.
Anticipating the strike, the record companies had stockpiled unreleased masters.11 They 
finished the year in reasonably good shape, but the musicians lost millions of dollars. As the de-
mand for new releases grew, however, the musicians began to prevail. Decca, now severed from 
its British parent, capitulated after thirteen months; previously the most “minor” of the major 
U.S. record labels, it became the nation’s largest record manufacturer after Petrillo lifted the ban.
12 Victor and c olumbia held out for another year. The strike ended when the record compa-
nies agreed to pay a royalty on record sales, which was used to finance a fund for out-of-work 
musicians. Petrillo couldn’t force radio to stop playing records, but at least somebody would 
pay for the privilege. By 1950, when WINS in New York announced plans to program records 
exclusively, the era of live music network radio had clearly come to an end.
It is not surprising that the musicians held out for as long as they did in their struggle to 
preserve radio as a live performance medium. Radio had provided steady work during a period when the vast bulk of most musicians’ income came from live performances. 
o
f course, at that 
time, live music on radio had meant music performed by white musicians for the most part. 
The AFM itself failed to extend protection to all musicians equally. In 1944, as Arnold Shaw has pointed out, the “NAA
c
P [National 
Association for the Advancement of 
c
olored People] noted that of 
[AFM’s] 673 locals, 32 were ‘colored.’ . . . [
o
]nly 2 locals, those in 
Detroit and New York, admitted Negroes to full membership.”13
Another group of artists that were not part of the AFM were 
vocalists. They were covered by a different union—currently called 
the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (AFTRA)—
which didn’t join the strike. Throughout the strike, vocalists recorded a cappella. By the time the 
musicians returned to the studios, the vocalists were in charge. 
 
Although the AFM strike prob-
ably was not a causal factor, it did mark a turning point in the rise of the solo vocalist and the decline of the big bands.
From Big Bands to Solo Singers
Initially, dance music was primarily an instrumental music. As swing (a danceable amalgam of 
blues, jazz, and Tin Pan Alley pop) grew in popularity in the mid-1930s, nearly all the big bands had begun to perform with vocalists. Paid less than other members of the band, vocalists were 
often limited to one chorus of a tune and were sometimes used simply to give instrumental 
soloists a rest. Audiences enjoyed the vocal numbers, however, and singers eventually became popular enough to begin solo careers. Female singers who worked with big bands were some of the first to break out. Ella Fitzgerald started her career with 
c
hick Webb; “ A-Tisket, A-Tasket” 
(1938) made her a pop star. Peggy Lee sang with Benny Goodman and Duke Ellington and then moved into songwriting and acting. Jo Stafford began with Tommy Dorsey and went on to record numerous pop hits that included folk and country material. Anita 
o
’Day graduated from 
the Max Miller combo to the Gene 
k
rupa and Stan 
k
enton bands and then to solo stardom. It is not surprising that the musicians 
held out for as long as they did in their 
struggle to preserve radio as a live per-
formance medium. Radio had provided 
steady work during a period when the vast bulk of most musicians’ income came from live performances.64 R ock IN ’ o UTBing c rosby, of course, was the most successful vocalist of the era, totaling more than 300 hits 
between 1931 and 1954.
The first pop vocalist to engender hysteria among fans was an Italian American who 
refused to anglicize his name—Frank Sinatra, the Sultan of Swoon. A song stylist with an 
unmistakable baritone, Sinatra won the Major Bowes Amateur Hour  with the 
h
oboken Four in 
1935 and then toured with Bowes for two years. In 1939, an appearance on WNEW’s Dance Parade led to engagements with the 
h
arry James and the Tommy Dorsey bands. According to 
legend, his 1942 appearance at the Paramount Theater with Benny Goodman unleashed a veri-table teen frenzy. At his return engagement two years later, 25,000 screaming bobby-soxers blocked the street in what was referred to as the 
c
olumbus Day Riot. From 1943 to 1945, Sina-
tra was the top vocalist on NB
c
’s Your Hit Parade.
Sinatra was also unique among the pop vocalists of the day because he was socially 
 
engaged. 
h
e supported Roosevelt for president and spoke out against racial and religious 
intolerance, even excising the word darky from his recording of Jerome 
k
ern’s and 
o
scar 
 h
ammerstein’s “
o
l’ Man River.” In the late 1940s, when he was accused of having both com -
munist and Mafia ties, his career faltered; it was revitalized by his 
o
scar-winning performance 
as Maggio in the 1954 film From Here to Eternity, a role he allegedly landed through Mafia in-
fluence. During this period, he also became a vicious opponent of rock ‘n’ roll.
Sinatra’s early success is perhaps the strongest indicator of the rise of the solo vocalist. 
h
is buyout of his contract with Tommy Dorsey in 1942, the same year as the AFM strike, 
marked the transition from big bands fronted by singers to vocalists backed up by big bands. As rock ‘n’ roll historian 
c
harlie Gillett has noted, “Records by the big bands dominated the 
best selling lists from 1937 to 1941. During this period band recordings accounted for twenty-
nine of the forty-three records that sold over a million copies each.”14 With the rise of the vo-
calists, however, the pop market was taken over by figures such as Bing 
c
rosby (“Swingin’ on a 
Star”), Dinah Shore (“I’ll Walk Alone,” “ Anniversary Song,” “Buttons and Bows”), and Vaughn 
Monroe (“Rum and 
c
oca 
c
ola,” “Let It Snow, Let It Snow, Let It Snow”).
Although a number of pop-sounding black vocal acts scored major hits in the pop mar-
ket in the postwar era—Nat “
k
ing” 
c
ole (“For Sentimental Reasons”), Ella Fitzgerald (“My 
 h
appiness”), the Mills Brothers (“ Across the Valley from the Alamo”), and the Ink Spots (“The 
Gypsy”)—the period was dominated by Italian American men. In addition to Sinatra, there was 
Perry 
c
omo (“Long Ago and Far Away”), Frankie Laine (“That’s My Desire,” “Mule Train”), Vic 
Damone (“You’re Breaking My 
h
eart”), Al Martino (“
h
ere in My 
h
eart”), Dean Martin (“That’s 
Amore”), and Tony Bennett (“Because of You,” “Rags to Riches,” “Stranger in 
 
Paradise”).15 
The rich tradition of heart-wrenching emotionality that had long been part of 
 
Italian popular 
song seemed quite well suited to American popular styles in the 1940s and 1950s.
If the rise of the solo vocalist pushed the big bands into the 
background, they were only one piece of a much larger cultural shift. The removal of World War II price ceilings on items like gas-oline made it more difficult to keep large orchestras on the road. Returning troops looking to start families reclaimed the well-pay-ing jobs that women had taken during the war, which effectively forced women back into the domestic sphere and replaced weekend HEAR MORE
Frank Sinatra on 
MySearchLab
Returning troops looking to start fami-
lies reclaimed the well-paying jobs that 
women had taken during the war, which 
effectively forced women back into the 
domestic sphere and replaced weekend rituals like dancing with more family-oriented activities. “Goo D  Rock IN ’ To NIG h T ”  65rituals like dancing with more family-oriented activities. These changes directly impacted the 
fate of such “all-girl” bands as the International Sweethearts of Rhythm, who had gained un -
precedented recognition during the war while so many male musicians were drafted overseas 
but faced difficulty remaining active in the postwar environment.16 As the audience that had 
supported the ballroom circuit dwindled, even the predominant male big bands closed shop. As 
Ian Whitcomb has written:
[Glenn] Miller died in a wartime plane crash, but Herman, James, and Dorsey had folded their 
original bands in late 1946, together with Benny Goodman and many others. The straighter, less jazzy bands like Lawrence Welk’s and Guy Lombardo’s survived (for a specialist and aging pub-
lic) but the Big Band Era, just over a decade, was finished.
17
While the better-known black bands, conspicuous in Whitcomb’s account by their absence, 
could count on an occasional hit record, such as Basie’s “
o
pen the Door, Richard” (1947), it 
was clear that an era had ended, especially for the hotter bands. Between 1947 and 1949, record 
sales dropped more than $50 million, over 20 percent of the dollar volume of the industry. The 
passing of the big bands created something of a void in popular music, which contributed to the rise of rhythm and blues and, to a lesser extent, country and western.
The Major Labels Reclaim Country Music
The population migrations that had begun with the pre–World War II military buildup had 
opened the possibility of nationwide markets for specialty music. During the war, the major record companies were unable to exploit this market because materials shortages significantly 
reduced the number of records that could be manufactured. (At the height of the shortage, 
often a person wanting to buy a new record had to return an old one first.) Because the main-stream audience alone could absorb almost all the records made, the major companies concen-trated their efforts on the mainstream market. The specialty fields—country, to some extent, but especially blues, jazz, and gospel—bore the brunt of the cutbacks.
Although record shortages had seriously limited the supply of specialty music, cross-
cultural contact had increased the demand for it. Moreover, the years surrounding the war were a time of great creative fruition in the country music realm. Ernest Tubb’s 1941 record, 
 
“Walking the Floor 
o
ver You,” was a stark tale of heartache that combined Tubb’s plaintive 
Southwestern drawl with a sharply played electric guitar solo by Fay “Smitty” Smith. The song 
laid the groundwork for a new country music style called honky-tonk that would gain further momentum after the war through the efforts of Lefty Frizzell, Webb Pierce, and especially 
h
ank 
 
Williams, whose career will be detailed shortly.
18 The early 1940s also saw the tradition-oriented 
sound of bluegrass begin to arise through the music of 
k
entucky native Bill Monroe. Monroe’s 
recordings made in the immediate postwar years with his Blue Grass Boys became the standard 
against which subsequent bluegrass music would be measured, and his 1946 song “Blue Moon 
of 
k
entucky” would, eight years later, be one of the first songs recorded by Elvis Presley.19
After the war, the major labels, concerned about their declining bottom lines, were in-
trigued by the possibility of nationwide markets for regional musics. In the postwar context, 66 R ock IN ’ o UThowever, the categories race and hillbilly seemed inappropriate, if not downright offensive. In 
1949, rhythm and blues became the official designation for what was once called race music. Also 
in the late 1940s, a range of competing categories started to displace the term hillbilly, the most 
prominent being folk  and country . According to country music scholar Richard Peterson, folk  
appeared likely to emerge as the new designation for the genre until it became tainted through 
its association with “
c
ommunist sympathizers” such as the popular folk group the Weavers, 
who were targets of Senator Joseph Mc
c
arthy’s anti-communist crusade. With folk temporar-
ily discredited, country or the compound country and western became the chosen industry term after 1950.
20
The strategies of the major companies for reclaiming country and western proved to be 
remarkably effective, if somewhat dispiriting in retrospect. According to Gillett, record compa-
nies exploited the “novelty” of the Southern accents of country and Western singers such as Tex 
Williams—singer of “Smoke That 
c
igarette” (1947), issued by 
c
apitol—or Gene Autry, whose 
many hits for 
c
olumbia included “Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer” (1950). 
c
ompanies also 
promoted country songs as pop songs when they closely approximated more broadly popular 
conventions, often by having the songs recorded by popular singers “in a style that was halfway 
between country and pop.”21 By marketing recordings like Frankie Laine’s “Mule Train” and 
“
h
igh Noon,” as Gillett suggests, country and western music was soon firmly back in the hands 
of the major companies. The one exception to this rule was 
k
ing Records in 
c
incinnati, 
o
hio, 
which boasted a strong roster of country and western artists like 
c
owboy 
c
opas, 
 h
awkshaw 
h
awkins, and Moon Mullican, who, as we shall see, came into regular contact with rhythm and 
blues and were heavily influenced by the western end of the country music spectrum.
The entry of two new major companies into the music industry during this period con-
tributed to the majors’ hold on country and western music. The first was MGM Records, formed originally in 1946 as an outlet for the film company’s movie soundtracks but soon ex-panded into other kinds of music. The second entry was Mercury, which began in 
c
hicago 
in 1947 as a specialty label focusing primar-
ily on polka and rhythm and blues. In 1947, Mercury signed Frankie Laine, whose mil-lion-seller hits, “Mule Train” (1949) and “
c
ry 
of the Wild Goose” (1950), were in the ersatz country mold. It was MGM, however, that picked up 
h
ank Williams, the biggest coun-
try and western star since Jimmie Rodgers.
A veteran of life on the road, Hank Williams  continued along 
the path pioneered by Jimmie 
 
Rodgers. His honky-tonk swag-
ger brought country music one step closer to rockabilly.
 “Goo D  Rock IN ’ To NIG h T ”  67
Some artists seem to embody the myths associated with their particular 
style of music: Robert Johnson with Delta blues, Charlie Parker with be-
bop jazz, Tupac with hip hop. The high-lonesome, alcohol-drenched image 
of honky-tonk country was embodied in Hank Williams, singer-songwriter 
extraordinaire. His songs were perfectly crafted gems, simple in structure but deep in feeling, intensely personal, and universally accessible. Dead 
before his time at age 29, Hank Williams’s long and celebrated shadow 
loomed over practically every country songwriter for the next two generations.
“Hey, Good Lookin’” was recorded in March 1951 during the same recording session as his equally famous song 
“I Can’t Help It If I’m Still in Love with You.” The other instrumental parts were provided by Hank’s Driftin’ Cowboys band, beefed up with a few studio musicians: Don Helms, steel guitar; Jerry Rivers, fiddle; Sammy Pruett, electric guitar; Jack Shook, rhythm guitar; Ernie Newton and Howard Watts, bass; and Owen Bradley and Fred Rose, piano.
Musical Style Notes
In contrast to the sad, soulful ballad style of “I’m So Lonesome I Could Cry” or “Your Cheatin’ Heart,” “Hey Good Lookin’” 
is one of Hank Williams’s up-tempo, honky-tonk songs with its backbeat (accents on beats two and four) and tasty steel guitar licks. The structure of the song is fairly straightforward: Each verse has an aaba form, where “a” is one melody 
that repeats several times with different lyrics and “b” is a contrasting melody. The instrumental in the middle of the song 
follows the same melodic form but gives the steel guitarist (Don Helms) and the fiddler (Jerry Rivers) a chance to show off their improvisational skills.
Musical “Road Map”
TIMINGS COMMENTS
0:00–0:07 Introduction, played by pedal (lap?) steel
0:07–0:21 Verse 1(a)
0:21–0:34 Verse 1(a)
0:34–0:48 Verse 1(b)
0:48–1:02 Verse 1(a)
1:02–1:29 Instrumental verse with solos
2 × (a) = lap steel solo
1:29–1:42 (b) = fiddle solo
1:42–1:56 (a) = lap steel returns with (a) melody
1:56–2:10 Verse 2(a)
2:10–2:23 Verse 2(a)
2:23–2:37 Verse 2(b)
2:37–2:50 Verse 2(a)
2:50–2:53 Last chord, fades“Hey, Good Lookin’”
Artist:
 
Hank Williams
Music/Lyrics by Hank Williams
Label:
 
MGM (1951)
Listening Guide 468 R ock IN ’ o UTWilliams began his singing career at the age of thirteen on k SFA in Montgomery, 
 
Alabama, and worked in roadhouses and honky-tonks for years. With Fred Rose as his 
 
manager, 
he registered his original compositions with Acuff-Rose in Nashville. 
h
e first recorded for 
the independent Sterling label in 1946 but switched to MGM in 1947 with assistance from 
Rose. Between 1949 and 1953, the year he died, eleven of his songs for MGM sold more than 1 
 
million copies each. Rose also plugged Williams’s songs to pop producers, and numerous 
 
popular artists recorded the tunes as pop country hits, including Frankie Laine, who recorded “Your 
c
heatin’ 
h
eart” and “Tonight We’re Settin’ the Woods on Fire.” Tony Bennett recorded 
“There’ll Be No Teardrops Tonight” and hit pop number one with “
c
old, 
c
old 
h
eart.” Guy 
Mitchell did “I 
c
an’t 
h
elp It,” and Rosemary 
c
looney scored with “
h
alf as Much.”
Altogether, Williams, who credited as his inspiration a black street singer nicknamed 
Tee Tot (Rufus Payne), penned about 125 songs. 
h
is honest, straightforward lyrics and catchy, 
well-crafted tunes lent his music to a variety of interpretations and established him as some-
thing of a folk poet. 
h
is honky-tonk swagger, working-class sympathies, use of backbeat (ac-
cents on the second and fourth beats of a measure), and hot live performances made him a vital link in the musical chain that joined Jimmie Rodgers and Texas troubadours like Bob Wills and Ernest Tubb to Elvis Presley. Like Rodgers before him, Williams was inducted into the Rock ‘n’ Roll 
h
all of Fame as an “early influence” in 1987.
The Independents Promote Rhythm and Blues
The major labels were able to bring country and western music firmly into their fold, and 
new developments in African American music seemed less desirable to them. During the big band era, the majors had contented themselves with connections to the most prominent black 
innovators of the big band sound and had lost touch with other developments in the rich and 
constantly evolving African American music culture. A number of African American musi-cians were now developing styles closer to the blues. As the swing era declined, rhythm and 
blues (r&b) came to the fore in working-class black communities. Amiri Baraka (a.k.a. Leroi Jones) described it as “huge rhythm units smashing away behind screaming blues singers.”
22 Because of its in-
sistent rhythms, uncontrolled energy, and suggestive content, the 
majors viewed r&b as unsuitable for mainstream consumption, so 
they decided to pass on the sound that would soon transform the 
very concept of popular music.
If there was one artist who signified the transition from the controlled energy and 
smooth delivery of the big bands to the unbridled emotion of rhythm and blues, it was Louis Jordan. Signed to Decca in 1939, Jordan and his group, the Tympani Five, anticipated the de-cline of the big bands and helped to define the instrumentation for the r&b combos that fol-lowed. With a much smaller horn section, rhythm became more pronounced. While Jordan’s material was composed and arranged, selections like “Saturday Night Fishfry,” “
h
oney 
c
hile,” 
and “ Ain’t Nobody 
h
ere but Us 
c
hickens” evoked blues images not found in most black pop. 
“
c
hickens,” for example, told the story of a farmer duped by a fox in his henhouse. “Those Because of its insistent rhythms, 
uncontrolled energy, and suggestive 
content, the majors viewed r&b as un-
suitable for mainstream consumption, 
so they decided to pass on the sound that would soon transform the very con-cept of popular music. “Goo D  Rock IN ’ To NIG h T ”  69lyrics,” according to George Lipsitz, “had their origins in the culture of . . . slavery. African 
legends about ‘trickster-hero buffoons’ provided the basis for slave stories in which animals or lesser gods outwitted stronger opponents.”
23 At the same time, Jordan’s performances were 
exceptionally engaging, a factor that measurably increased his mainstream acceptance.
Between 1944 and 1949, Jordan furnished Decca with nineteen pop hits. 
h
is “G.I. Jive,” 
backed with “Is You Is or Is You Ain’t My Baby?” (1944), sold 1 million copies, as did “
c
hoo 
c
hoo 
c
h’Boogie” (1946). The shuffle boogie beat that he used is one of the elements that fol-
lowed r&b into rock ‘n’ roll. Like Jordan, whose music was described as “jumpin’ the blues,” 
most r&b artists of the late 1940s screeched, honked, and shouted their way to success. This raucous music—of artists such as Wynonie 
h
arris (“Good Rockin’ Tonight”), John Lee 
h
ooker 
(“Boogie 
c
hillen”), Eddie “
c
leanhead” Vinson (“I’m Weak but I’m Willing”), Bullmoose 
 
Jackson 
(“I Want a Bow-Legged Woman”), Joe Liggins and the 
h
oneydrippers (“
h
oneydripper”), 
 
saxophonist Big Jay McNeely (“Deacon’s 
h
op”), drummer Roy Milton (“The 
h
ucklebuck”), 
and pianist Amos Milburn (“Bad, Bad Whiskey”)—was a harbinger of sounds to come.
The success of these artists speaks to what Nelson George has referred to as “an aes -
thetic schism between high-brow, more assimilated black styles and working-class, grassroots 
sounds” that had existed in the black community for a long time.24 A number of writers, nota -
bly Baraka, have written at length about class differences between jazz and blues. While jazz 
was an immensely popular and influential crossover music that introduced elements of the Af-
rican American tradition into the mainstream, in some ways it was also a product of the black 
middle class. By the 1930s, jazz was a music that had “moved away from the older lowdown  
forms of blues. . . . [It was] a music that still relied on older Afro-American musical tradition, but one that had begun to utilize still greater amounts of popular American music as well as certain formal European traditions.”
25
The pioneer r&b artists of the 1940s were more attuned to working-class black sensibili-
ties, and their popularity in the black community in many ways represented a resuscitation of 
Louis Jordan was a pivotal musician in the development 
of rhythm and blues. He and his group, the Tympani Five, brought African American working-class sensibilities into the 
mainstream with polish and 
 
humor. Film clips of their engag-
ing performances were shown in movie theaters between 
features.70 R ock IN ’ o UTthe blues, or race, market of the 1920s and 1930s. “While the term ‘jazz’ gave Whiteman equal 
weight with Ellington, and Bix Beiderbecke comparable standing with Louis Armstrong,” George has written, “the term ‘race’ was applied to forms of black music—primarily blues—
that whites and . . . the black elite disdained.”
26 In the glow of postwar affluence, the African 
American working class imposed its tastes on black popular music and the results were electri-
fying (and electrified):
Suddenly it was as if a great deal of the Euro-American humanist facade Afro-American 
 
music 
had taken on had been washed away by the war. Rhythm & blues singers literally had to shout to 
be heard above the clanging and strumming of the various electrified instruments and the churn-
ing rhythm sections. And somehow the louder the instrumental accompaniment and the more harshly screamed the singing, the more expressive the music was.
27
Because of the demand for r&b, several hundred independent labels were able to enter 
the business. By the early 1950s, more than 100 of these labels were still in operation. The 
most 
 
important were Aladdin, Modern, Specialty, and Imperial in Los Angeles; Atlantic in 
New York; Savoy in Newark, New Jersey; 
k
ing in 
c
incinnati, 
o
hio; 
c
hess in 
c
hicago; and 
 
black-owned Duke/Peacock in 
h
ouston. While some of them produced country and 
 
western 
music, all of them produced r&b. These companies, along with other important 
 
independents 
founded later—
h
erald/Ember and several others in New York, black-owned Vee Jay in 
 c
hicago, and Sun in Memphis—produced r&b first for the black community and, with the 
aid of jukeboxes and independent deejays, brought the music to the attention of a national 
 
audience. Indeed, companies like these produced the bulk of the repertoire that constituted the 
foundation of rock ‘n’ roll. Perhaps the best indication of their success in popularizing r&b can be seen in Billboard’s 1949 decision to drop the term race music in favor of the more descriptive 
rhythm and blues.
k
ing Records was distinguished by its ability to produce r&b and country and western 
with equal success. No doubt, the fact that the city of 
c
incinnati offered significant outlets for 
blues, jazz, and country music contributed measurably to 
k
ing’s good fortune. While African 
Americans had less access to the airwaves in 
c
incinnati than other performers—Fats Waller’s 
WLW broadcasts in 1932 stand out as a notable exception—the entertainment needs of the city’s sizable black population were addressed in live music venues like the 
c
otton 
c
lub. The 
bands of Lucky Millinder, Todd Rhodes, and Tiny Bradshaw were among those that toured the region regularly.
Syd Nathan brought the city’s divergent musical tendencies together when he started 
k
ing Records in 1945. From the beginning, he was eclectic in his musical acquisitions and as-
tute, if ruthless, in his business decisions. Nathan signed the Delmore Brothers, Grandpa Jones, and 
h
ank Penny, as well as the next generation of country singers, including 
c
owboy 
c
opas, 
Moon Mullican, 
h
awkshaw 
h
awkins, and Wayne Raney. Mullican, the 
k
ing of the 
h
illbilly 
Piano Players, was a pioneer of country boogie. 
h
is influence on early rock ‘n’ roll can be heard 
in the piano playing of Jerry Lee Lewis and others.
Initially, most of 
k
ing’s r&b artists were issued on Nathan’s Queen label, established to 
separate r&b releases from country releases. An innovative wrinkle to this separation added  “Goo D  Rock IN ’ To NIG h T ”  71measurably to the company’s profit margin. Nathan, largely for reasons of economic self-in-
terest, encouraged his black artists and white artists to record each other’s material. 
k
ing was 
perhaps the only independent record company that had equally strong rosters of r&b and c&w 
artists. As 
k
ing’s African American producer 
h
enry Glover told Arnold Shaw, the label al-
ready had an established policy of having country singers cover r&b songs and r&b singers 
cover country songs by the time he started his work for 
k
ing. Examples included Bullmoose 
Jackson’s 1949 hit, “Why Don’t You 
h
aul 
o
ff and Love Me”—a cover of a Wayne Raney coun-
try hit—and Wynonie 
h
arris’ 1951 record, “Bloodshot Eyes,” which originated as a record by 
country artist 
h
ank Penny. Recalled Glover, “when a song happened in one field, Syd Nathan 
wanted to move it into the other…. And since Syd published most of the tunes we recorded, he was also augmenting his publishing income and building important copyrights. 
h
e was a 
smart businessman and he didn’t miss a trick. ”28 Whatever Nathan’s motivation, his actions 
produced a far greater cultural mix than might otherwise have occurred. 
o
f course, the key to 
the company’s success in these crossover ventures was the free hand that Nathan gave Glover 
in recording both r&b and c&w acts. No producer spanned the two 
fields more successfully. The fact that Glover wrote and/or produced many of 
k
ing’s r&b hits marked him as successful. The fact that he 
consciously sought out country artists with whom to accomplish the same success moves him closer to the status of legend. Under Glover’s musical direction, the 
k
ing empire not only maintained a 
foothold in country music but became one of the premiere r&b labels as well.
Like 
k
ing Records, 
c
hess Records in 
c
hicago was another instance of successful col-
laboration between Jewish businessmen and black producers. Brothers Leonard and Phil 
c
hess 
were Jewish immigrants from Poland who had settled in 
c
hicago in 1928. In the 1940s, they 
owned and operated the Macomba, a nightclub that presented talent such as Louis Armstrong, 
Lionel 
h
ampton, Billy Eckstine, and Ella Fitzgerald. Struck by the lack of adequate 
 
recording 
facilities in 
c
hicago, the brothers took over Aristocrat Records in 1947 and changed its name 
to 
c
hess in 1950, eventually establishing three subsidiaries, 
c
hecker, 
c
adet, and Argo. With 
a small studio in the back room of its storefront record company, 
c
hess was a 
 
quintessential 
shoestring operation, distributing records from the trunks of the owners’ cars and using re-cording techniques such as hanging a mike in a tiny toilet to add echo.
29 Even so, c hess  Records 
managed to turn out some of the most significant urban blues recordings and eventually to 
 
become one of the most important rock ‘n’ roll labels in the country.
o
ne key to 
c
hess’s success was Willie Dixon, a Mississippian who had been associated 
with the label as a singer, composer, bassist, talent scout, and producer since its days as Aristo-
crat. Leonard 
c
hess thought of Dixon as “his right arm.” Among the 200 or so songs written 
by Dixon were “I’m Ready,” “My Babe,” “Little Red Rooster,” and “Wang Dang Doodle.” 
h
e 
contributed in other capacities to any number of hits by 
c
hess artists, including Muddy Waters 
and 
h
owlin’ Wolf.
Mississippi Delta–born Muddy Waters (née Mc
k
inley Morganfield) was one of 
c
hess’s 
earliest discoveries. Alan Lomax and John Work, working for the Library of 
c
ongress, HEAR MORE
Chess Records on 
MySearchLabThe fact that Glover wrote and/or pro-
duced many of King’s r&b hits marked 
him as successful. The fact that he 
consciously sought out country artists 
with whom to accomplish the same success moves him closer to the status of legend.72 R ock IN ’ o UTrecorded Waters, a master of slide guitar, in 1941. When Waters heard the sound of his 
recorded voice and guitar played back to him, he gained a new confidence in his musical abili-ties that motivated his move to 
c
hicago two years later, in 1943.30 once there, he switched 
to electric guitar while adapting the sound and style of rural Delta blues to his new urban setting. Waters followed the 
c
hess brothers from Aristocrat, where he had recorded “I 
c
an’t 
Be Satisfied” and “I Feel Like Goin’ 
h
ome,” to 
c
hess, where he followed up with one of his 
first hits, the immortal “Rolling Stone.” Subsequent recordings included “
h
oochie 
c
oochie 
Man” (1954), “I Just Want to Make Love to You” (1954), and “Mannish Boy” (1955), on 
which Waters moved from his early recorded style of solo blues with spare accompaniment 
to leading what blues historian Robert Palmer called “the first important electric band, the first to use amplification to make their ensemble music rawer, more ferocious, more physical, instead of simply making it a little louder.”
31 Most of the next generation of c hicago blues 
musicians, including Buddy Guy, Junior Wells, and James 
c
otton, passed through Waters’s 
band. 
 
Waters was a major inspiration for the white blues revival of the 1960s, which featured 
artists such as Paul Butterfield, Nick Gravenites, and Mike Bloomfield. When the Rolling Stones took their name from Waters’s early 
c
hess hit, he remarked: “They stole my music, 
but they gave me my name.”32
Perhaps the most important of the new independent labels was Atlantic Records, founded 
in 1947 by Ahmet Ertegun, the son of a prominent Turkish diplomat, and 
h
erb Abramson, the 
former recording director for National Records. Jerry Wexler, a reviewer for Billboard said to 
have coined the term rhythm and blues, joined the company in 1953 and went on to become head of artist and repertoire. In 1956, Ertegun’s brother, Nesuhi, created what would become a dis -
tinguished jazz division. Both brothers were avid jazz and blues collectors, with some 30,000 records in their private collection. Perhaps their privileged position and their love of the music gave them an advantage over entrepreneurs who entered the business solely as a commercial gambit because the Erteguns attracted outstanding talent. Ahmet in particular enjoyed a repu-tation for honesty and integrity in his treatment of black artists, which was unmatched at the time but challenged years later when several Atlantic artists successfully sued the company for unpaid back royalties.
The company first hit r&b pay dirt in 1949 with Stick McGhee’s “Drinkin’ Wine 
 
Spo-dee-o-dee.” Its first star was Ruth Brown, who turned out eleven Top Ten r&b hits between 
1949 and 1954, including “So Long” (1949), “Tear-
drops from My Eyes” (1950), “5-10-15 
h
ours” 
(1952), and “(Mama) 
h
e Treats Your Daughter 
Mean” (1953). She was rewarded with a contract that guaranteed her $100,000 over five years. For a time, Atlantic was known as “the house that Ruth built.” Big Joe Turner, signed after Ahmet Erte-gun heard him perform with the Basie band at the Apollo, also turned out a series of blockbuster r&b 
hits for Atlantic—“
c
hains of Love” (1951), “Sweet 
Sixteen” (1952), and “
h
oney 
h
ush” (1953). By the 
early 1950s, Atlantic was the most important r&b HEAR MORE
Muddy Waters on 
MySearchLab
Ruth Brown began singing in the church. 
The lure of rhythm and blues, however, led her to Atlantic Records, where she became 
the fledgling label’s first big star. Although 
Atlantic was among the most reputable companies and Brown had a decent contract, years later she sued the label for back royal-
ties and won.
 “Goo D  Rock IN ’ To NIG h T ”  73
“(Mama) He Treats Your Daughter Mean” was a big hit in 1953 for Ruth 
Brown and Atlantic. In terms of its driving dance rhythms, instrumentation, 
and sixteen-bar blues structure, and its slightly suggestive lyrics, it’s a clas-
sic example of 1950s rhythm and blues style.
Musical Style Notes
“(Mama) He Treats Your Daughter Mean” has a typical r&b text and rhyth-
mic pattern. It begins with a pickup (if you were counting “And-a one, and-a 
two,” the “and-a” is a pickup). The overall rhythmic pattern is subdivided into four-beat units, or measures:
(and-a) 1 2 3 4
In r&b, the primary accents fall on 2 and 4. The r&b “swing” feeling comes partly from the fact that each one of 
those four beats is subdivided into three equal parts, called triplets.
Major beats in the measure and-a 1 2 3 4
Subdivision of beat into triplets 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3
The drumbeats can be shown, with a slash representing an accented strike and a dash representing an unaccented 
strike, as follows:
Major beats in the measure and-a 1 2 3 4
Subdivision of beat into triplets 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3
Drum strikes here /
  
– / /
  
– / /
  
–
In other words, the drummer actually hits the drum a fraction of a second after the ear expects the next downbeat, yield-
ing a looser, more relaxed feeling to the rhythm. Meanwhile, the other instruments and the singer may put rhythmic ac-
cents in different places. For example, when Ruth Brown begins singing, the text accents fall on beats 1 and 3:
(and-a) 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4
1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3
/
  
– / /
  
– / /
  
– / /
  
– / /
  
–
Mama - - - - - - - - he treats your daugh- ter mean
This use of layers of different rhythms, or polyrhythms, is one of the most prominent characteristics of African American music styles.
The song begins with the refrain, which then repeats after each verse. The melody of the verse is different from 
the melody of the refrain, although both are characterized by short melodic units that repeat several times and then are varied at the end. For instrumentation, the track uses drums, electric guitar, acoustic piano, and a horn section—in this case, simply a saxophone and a trumpet.“(Mama) He Treats Your  
Daughter Mean”
Artist:
 
Ruth Brown
Music/Lyrics by Herb Lance, John 
Wallace, and Charlie Singleton
Label:
 
Atlantic (1953)
Listening Guide 574 R ock IN ’ o UT
Listening Guide 5Musical “Road Map”
TIMINGS COMMENTS
0:00–0:05 Drum introduction, 2 measures
0:05–0:12 Introduction continues; saxophones and guitar join. Notice that they don’t play exactly the same 
rhythmic accents as the drum. The saxes, for example, put the accent on the 3 in the triplet, which creates a syncopation with the drums. The guitar is emphasizing the triplet division of the beat.
0:12–0:43
0:17
0:36–0:37RefrainNotice the vocal technique of “sliding” the pitch up in the second syllable of “Mama.”Piano enters, also emphasizing the triplet division of the beat.Note how Brown “bends the pitch” on the word meanest, wringing a great deal of expression from 
this one word!
0:43–1:16
1:07Verse 1
The actual 16-bar pattern begins on the word treats.The melody changes on the last line, “All of my friends say they don’t understand—what’s the 
matter with this man?”
Note that the horn section plays more sparsely on the verse. This helps to highlight the singer’s 
part and differentiates the verse from the refrain.
1:17–1:46 Refrain
1:20 Full horn section enters here, providing sonic contrast with first refrain.
1:47–2:21
2:12Verse 2
The actual 16-bar pattern begins on the word man.As in verse 1, the melody changes on the last line,“I’ve stood for all that I can stand—what’s the matter with this man?”
2:21–2:552:47–2:55RefrainRuth Brown varies the melody just slightly at the end, elongating the words I’ve ever seen to signal 
the end of the song. The band responds with an ending phrase that is almost a cliché in r&b: the ascending scale followed by a strongly accented keynote (tonic). Over that last sustained note, you can hear the keyboard add one last rhythmic lick—another characteristic of blues and rhythm and blues. “Goo D  Rock IN ’ To NIG h T ”  75
label in the country, with a talent roster that also included LaVern Baker, Ray c harles, the c lo-
vers, and the Drifters. Its releases began to cross over to the pop charts by 1954. 
h
its such as 
the 
c
hords’ “Sh’Boom,” Baker’s “Tra La La” and “Jim Dandy,” Joe Turner’s “Shake, Rattle, and 
Roll,” and Brown’s “Lucky Lips” made an unmistakable imprint on rock ‘n’ roll.
Mass Technology and Popular Taste
If the abandonment of certain specialty fields by the major labels allowed independents to 
enter the business, technological advances helped them to survive and even to gain ground. Television, because of its devastating impact on network radio, helped to clear the airwaves 
for local, independent broadcasting. Increasingly, the growth of independent record companies 
and of independent radio stations made it possible for consumers to hear the music so many were hungry for—rhythm and blues.
High Fidelity/Low Overhead
The first technical advance that had a marked impact on independent production was magnetic 
tape recording, “liberated” from the Nazis during World War II. Using a plastic tape coated with iron oxide as its recording medium, magnetic tape could be edited and spliced; it was more 
durable, more portable, and less expensive, with better sound reproduction, than the wire record-
ing it replaced. After the technology was smuggled back into the United States, the 
 
Minnesota 
 Mining and Manufacturing 
c
ompany (3M) produced a tape that surpassed the sound quality of 
the 
 
German product. At the same time, tape recorder manufacturers reduced recording speeds 
from 30 inches per second (ips) to 15 ips, and then to 7.5 ips without seriously compromising 
sound quality, thus quadrupling the amount of material that could be recorded on a standard tape. 
 c
rucial to this expansion of tape recording practices was the production of the Ampex 
Model 200 tape recording machine in 1948 and its successors, which became industry stan-dards.
33  Ampex would later develop the first commercial multiple track tape recording machines 
using the techniques pioneered by guitarist Les Paul—discussed in the introduction—as a model.
The transistor, introduced by Bell Laboratories in 1948, was a welcome companion to the 
new recording technology. By incorporating all the functions of the vacuum tube into a solid state environment, devices using transistors could be made smaller, less power hungry, and more durable than cumbersome tube amplifiers. Smaller, more af-fordable, longer-lasting recording equipment aided independent pro-duction. The transistor made truly portable radio receivers possible for the first time. With the advent of portable transistor radios, teen-agers, soon to become an identifiable consumer group, could 
 
explore 
their developing musical tastes in complete privacy.
Also in 1948, scientists at 
c
BS laboratories, working under the leadership of Dr. Peter 
Goldmark and William Bachman, invented high fidelity. This breakthrough yielded the mi-
crogroove, or long-playing (LP), 33 revolutions per minute (rpm) record, which increased the number of grooves per inch on a standard record from 85 to 300. Years later, Goldmark de-scribed the challenge the creation of the LP had presented to the group:With the advent of portable transis-
tor radios, teenagers, soon to become 
an identifiable consumer group, could 
explore their developing musical tastes 
in complete privacy.76 R ock IN ’ o UTFirst of all, to provide more playing time, it was necessary to change the number of grooves—
which then necessitated changing the speed—which, in turn, required offsetting the resulting dis-tortion—which then required offsetting the limitation of frequency response which would have 
occurred. . . . So we had to change the radius of the stylus. We went from sapphire to diamond. 
But, in order for the tiny radii not to chew up the record, we had to reduce the pressure. . . . Then you had wonderful sound quality, but you didn’t have a microphone capable of creating wonderful sounds. . . . We . . . had to . . . develop a new kind of microphone, which turned out to be the con-denser microphone . . . [that] the Germans already had invented.
34
“In other words,” Goldmark concluded, “we had to develop a whole new science.”35
hoping to make the LP the industry standard, c olumbia’s Ted Wallerstein demonstrated 
it to David Sarnoff and other R
c
A executives. When the record played for twenty-three min-
utes without stopping, the R
c
A executives realized that 
c
olumbia had pulled off a major coup. 
Sarnoff responded with polite approval and promptly directed his technical staff to come up 
with a record that could play at a different speed. In what was to become known as the “battle 
of the speeds”—pitting 
c
olumbia’s LP against R
c
A’s newly developed 45 rpm record—the 
two firms produced “unbreakable” vinylite discs with excellent sound quality and maximum durability. The size of the 45 caught the fancy of jukebox manufacturers and soon became the preferred configuration for singles, while the LP became the industry standard for albums.
Because of these technological advances, records emerged as a relatively inexpensive medium 
compared to radio, film, and television, which all required huge sums of money for production, elaborate systems for transmission, and/or complex bureaucratic arrangements. For this reason, 
in part, small independent labels were able to challenge the giants that 
monopolized the music business. Records soon became the staple of all radio programming and the dominant product of the music industry as a whole. By the early 1950s, record companies were replacing publish-ing houses as the power centers of the music industry, and radio had established its primacy over the jukebox as the number one hit maker.
Television and the Suppression of FM Broadcasting
In the late 1940s, the entry of frequency modulation (FM) broadcasting into the marketplace 
was intentionally, if temporarily, suppressed because it conflicted with the development of tele-vision. Ironically, the advent of television then opened the door to independent radio—and 
thus to greater dissemination of r&b.
Messages can be sent over the airwaves either by modulating, or varying, their ampli-
tude (size) or by modulating their frequency (rate of propagation). Early technical limitations 
favored the development of amplitude modulation (AM), as opposed to FM, even though AM broadcasting was more subject to static from stations on adjacent frequencies.
36 This problem 
drove David Sarnoff to wish out loud for “a little black box to eliminate [radio] static.”37 In-
trigued by the wish, inventor Edwin 
h
. Armstrong spent the next ten years developing a pat-
ented transmission system using an FM signal in the very-high-frequency (V
h
F) range of the 
electromagnetic spectrum. An impressed Sarnoff moved Armstrong’s operation to the R
c
A fa-
cilities atop the Empire State Building. In 1935, however, Sarnoff reneged on his commitment By the early 1950s, record companies 
were replacing publishing houses as the 
power centers of the music industry, 
and radio had established its primacy 
over the jukebox as the number one hit maker. “Goo D  Rock IN ’ To NIG h T ”  77to Armstrong’s invention, announcing instead a $1 million R c A research initiative to develop 
television. Understanding even then that television would replace radio as the primary enter-
tainment fixture in the home, Sarnoff decided to back the visual medium.
The outbreak of World War II stalled the further development of television and FM. 
After the war, the Federal 
c
ommunications 
c
ommission (F
cc
) assigned FM radio to the fre-
quency band between television channels 6 and 7 (88 to 108 megacycles), where FM later 
thrived. At the time, however, the ruling was devastating; it placed FM into a band for which neither transmitters nor receivers existed. Investors in FM promptly withdrew their money, and pending applications for FM licenses fell victim to bureaucratic shuffling. The public de-mand for radio was met through the manufacture of 6.5 million new AM receivers in 1946, as opposed to only 80,000 FM receivers, even though the latter produced better sound.
Television became a viable consumer item in the late 1940s. By 1951, nearly 16 million 
televisions were in operation in the United States, luring national advertising away from net-
work radio. Independent radio, on the other hand, emerged as an effective medium for local advertisers because stations doubled to 2,000 between 1946 and 1948. Eventually, the most suc-cessful independent radio outlets pushed aside the more staid network stations and cemented a reciprocal arrangement with record companies that has defined the music industry ever since: inexpensive programming in return for free promotion. At the time, these technological  
advances set the stage for the explosive popularity of independent deejays spinning r&b discs.
Independent Radio: Deejays in Your Face
With the devastation of network radio by television, local radio became the primary vehicle 
for popularizing the music produced by independent record companies and licensed to BMI, which—technically—the broadcasters owned. And as national programming gave way to hun-
dreds of locally programmed stations, each appealing to its own 
audience, the flawless, even-toned, accent-free radio voice of the typi-cal announcer soon went the way of studio orchestras. Fast-talking deejays—personality jocks—took over, and their stock in trade was their own eccentricity. These deejays enjoyed a personal involvement with their listeners. “We were the stars in our hometown,” said deejay Diggie Doo. “We went to the churches, we went to the clubs, to the schools, the little kids knew us.”
38 They not only talked to their fans, 
they talked like their fans. From his late night slot on W
o
V in New York, Jocko 
 h
enderson held 
forth in classic jive: “Eeeee tiddilee yok. 
h
o, this is the Jock. I’m back on the scene with the re-
cord machine. Saying goo bop-a doo, how do you do.”39 hardly the k ing’s English of an earlier 
generation of announcers, Jocko’s rhymes are often cited as one of the formative influences in rap.
Replacing the live entertainment personalities who had dominated national radio, these 
independent deejays became, for a time, pivotal figures in the music industry. Record compa-nies routinely supplied them with free new releases, hoping they could turn them into hits. 
 
Relying on their own inventiveness for popularity, independent deejays often experimented with specialty music and, in most cases, the key to their success turned out to be r&b.As national programming gave way 
to hundreds of locally programmed 
stations, each appealing to its own 
audience, the flawless, even-toned, 
accent-free radio voice of the typical announcer soon went the way of studio orchestras.78 R ock IN ’ o UTR&b radio represented a considerable departure from standard radio practices. Up to this 
point, not much black music had been broadcast and few African American announcers had 
been used. As late as 1947, Ebony magazine had reported that, out of an estimated 3,000 deejays 
around the country, only sixteen were black.40 What deejays there were usually followed the ex-
ample of Jack L. 
c
ooper, a veteran black announcer from the 1930s who had eschewed all traces 
of black dialect. In r&b radio, however, black deejays and white deejays existed from the start. While pay scales usually favored white personnel, the new breed of black deejays set the tone:
[B]lack disk jockeys were a much more colorful group of platter-spinners than their white  
brethren. . . . Black jockeys tended to take over the manners and mannerisms of black preachers. They 
were showmen rather than announcers. Their job was to entertain, not just to introduce 
 
records. By 
the early ’50s, there were quite a number who had made names for themselves on ghetto stations.41
Pioneer black r&b deejays as well as popular white r&b deejays who modeled themselves 
after these “preacher-emcees” first proliferated in the South.42 By the early 1950s, a number of 
so-called Negro stations in the South had proven to be quite successful. In St. Louis, Spider 
Burks addressed himself to the city’s 328,000 African Americans over station 
k
XLW . WDIA 
in Memphis, the country’s only 50,000-watt black-oriented station, could broadcast to nearly 
10 percent of the country’s 12 million African Americans. WS
ok
 in Nashville claimed to have 
several black stockholders. And, in 1951, WERD in Atlanta became the first totally black-
owned radio outlet in the country.
R&b radio also flourished in those major cities of the North and West that had large con-
centrations of African Americans. There was a black r&b deejay named Willie Mays on 
k
SAN 
in San Francisco, and two white r&b jocks across the bay—“Jumpin’” George 
o
xford and Phil 
Mc
k
ernan (father of the late Pigpen of Grateful Dead fame). In Los Angeles, a white deejay 
named 
h
unter 
h
ancock remained among the city’s top-rated r&b deejays for twenty years.
In 
c
hicago, Delta bluesman Muddy Waters held forth on W
o
PA before going on to 
record for 
c
hess records. There was also a white r&b deejay on W
o
PA, Big Bill 
h
ill, who 
sang the blues and sold 
c
adillacs in his version of highly stylized black speech: “ Ah doan ca’ 
if you got gahnashees on yo’ gahnashees, ah cain p’choo in a big bread box by fo’ o’clock dis 
aftanoon!”43 however, c hicago’s premiere r&b deejay in the late 1940s was Al Benson, “Yo’ o l’ 
Swingmaster,” an African American. At the peak of his popularity, Benson hosted five shows 
on a number of stations and earned as much as $100,000 a year. “Benson killed the 
k
ing’s 
 
English,” recalled one of Benson’s young Milwaukee colleagues. “
h
e wasn’t pretending to be 
white. 
h
e sounded black . . . and most of us were proud of the fact.”44 he made something 
of a splash in 1956 when “[h]e hired two white men (because he feared violence to himself) 
to shower five thousand copies of the 
c
onstitution on Jackson, Mississippi, to emphasize the 
 
Supreme 
c
ourt’s antisegregation ruling.”45
New York and its environs were, of course, the center for r&b radio in the Northeast. In 
addition to a number of white deejays—George “
h
ound Dog” Lorenz in Buffalo, Danny “
c
at 
Man” Stiles in Newark, “Symphony Sid” Torin at WM
c
A in New York 
c
ity—the city also had 
a raucous contingent of black announcers/entertainers. Willie Bryant, “the Mayor of 
h
arlem,” 
and Ray 
c
arroll broadcast their program After Hours Swing Session on W
ho
M, a foreign-
language station by day. Jack Walker, “the Pear-Shaped Talker,” appeared on foreign-language  “Goo D  Rock IN ’ To NIG h T ”  79outlet W o V . Joe Bostic, who started at WBNX, held down a late-
night slot for his program Harlem Music Shop on WINS. Tommy 
Smalls broadcast from WWRL, and Phil “Dr. Jive” Gordon broad-
cast from WLIB.
Unlike dance halls, record stores, and jukeboxes, the airwaves 
could not be segregated. If white teenagers wanted to turn their ra-
dio dials to the local r&b station, they were free to do so, and ap-parently that is exactly what they did. As early as 1952, Dolphin’s 
h
ollywood Record Shop, a black retail outlet in Los Angeles, reported that, because of inde -
pendent deejays spinning r&b records, its business was suddenly 40 percent white. A change in popular music tastes was emerging as listeners across racial lines began calling into radio stations (not yet a widespread practice) to request Fats Domino’s “The Fat Man” (1950); Jackie 
Brenston’s “Rocket 88” (1951); Lloyd Price’s “Lawdy Miss 
c
lawdy” (1952); and Joe Turner’s 
“
c
hains of Love” (1951), “Sweet Sixteen” (1952), and “
h
oney 
h
ush” (1953)—all on indepen-
dent labels.
The most famous of all the r&b deejays was a white 
o
hioan named Alan Freed, who had 
fronted a jazz band called the Sultans of Swing in high school. When his career as a deejay on WA
k
R in Akron stalled in the late 1940s, he drank heavily and blamed the music he was play-
ing, saying that jazz had become too abstract and intellectualized to be “the people’s music” and that “the run-of-the-mill, country-affected, pop-hit sound didn’t do anything for him.”
46 Then 
in 1951, Leo Mintz, a record store owner in 
c
leveland who sponsored WJW’s Record Rendez-
vous program, convinced Freed to take over the radio show and devote it to r&b. Freed bayed 
like a hound over Todd Rhodes’s “Blues for Moon Dog” to introduce the show that became The 
Moon Dog House Rock ‘n’ Roll Party. 
h
is gravelly voice and colorful announcing style were well 
suited to his new material. Freed’s show proved so popular that he was hired by WINS in New York, which he turned into the number one popular music station in the city.
47Unlike dance halls, record stores, and 
jukeboxes, the airwaves could not be 
segregated. If white teenagers wanted 
to turn their radio dials to the local 
r&b station, they were free to do so, and apparently that is exactly what they did.
Alan Freed, pictured with Chuck 
Berry and Sandy Stewart from the film Go, Johnny Go, was a reluc-
tant convert to rhythm and blues, 
but, once convinced, he played a crucial role in popularizing rock ‘n’ roll, and later became the sacrifi-
cial lamb in the government inves-
tigations into payola.80 R ock IN ’ o UTFreed claimed to have invented the term rock ‘n’ roll . While ample evidence suggests 
that he was the first to use the expression on radio, the phrase had been around the 
 
African 
 
American community for years. What is beyond dispute, however, is that the trajectory of 
Freed’s career paralleled the rise and fall of this exciting new trend in popular music almost 
perfectly. “ Anyone who says rock ‘n’ roll is a passing fad or flash-in-the-pan trend along the music road,” Freed once said, “has rocks in his head, Dad!”
48 how right he was. Early in 1956, 
Billboard ran a retrospective piece on popular music trends for the previous year under the 
headline, “1955—T
h
E YEAR R&B T
ook
 
o
VER P
o
P FIELD.”
In the 1940s, all the forces that would unleash rock ‘n’ roll were set in motion. The tension 
 
between ASCAP and radio set the stage for the structural realignments that affected the very 
character of popular music. There were subsequent struggles between radio and the musicians’ union and within the radio establishment itself (between network and independent stations). The death throes of swing created a void that signaled a culture in flux. Technological advances favoring decentralization allowed small independent record companies and flamboyant local deejays to become major players in the music business. Rivalries among giant record companies 
and competition between major and independent labels provided the corporate backdrop for the cultural developments that led to the rise of rhythm and blues in the late 1940s and the eruption 
of rock ‘n’ roll in the next decade.
LEARN MORE
Chapter Test on 
MySearchLab  81
4
Trying to pinpoint the beginning of rock ‘n’ roll is like  
trying to isolate the first drop of rain in a hurricane. The uninitiated may 
claim it began in 1955 when “Rock Around the Clock” by Bill Haley and 
His Comets became the best-selling record of the year. Others may want 
to date the phenomenon from the first rock ‘n’ roll record to make the pop charts, but no one agrees on which record that was. Charlie 
 
Gillett 
has said it was Bill Haley’s “Crazy Man Crazy” in 1953.1 Nick Tosches has argued for “Sixty 
 
Minute Man,” recorded by the Dominoes in 1951.2 Writer Jim Dawson and deejay Steve Propes 
decided “to pick out the [records] which have elements of rock ‘n’ roll in them—and which 
 
influenced the music that followed” and ended up debating among fifty contenders.3
Of course, part of the problem in determining the beginning of rock ‘n’ roll is that rock 
‘n’ roll evolved over time; it was not a one-time event. There is also an issue of definition. There 
is rock ‘n’ roll, the musical genre unto itself; rock ‘n’ roll, the seemingly more acceptable term 
for rhythm and blues (r&b); and rock ‘n’ roll, the sexual metaphor. While Haley’s “Crazy Man 
Crazy” fits the first definition well enough, the Dominoes’ “Sixty Minute Man” highlights all three. “Sixty Minute Man” was a popular r&b release that crossed over to the mainstream audi-ence; such r&b crossovers were often called rock ‘n’ roll to obscure their origins. The song’s hero is a legendary lover who “rocks” and “rolls” his partners the whole night long, leaving little doubt as to the sexual connotation of the term.
It is ironic that the term rock ‘n’ roll, eventually used 
by many white r&b deejays to give rhythm and blues a more wholesome veneer, had been common in African American 
music for years as a slang term for the sexual act. Thus, one might date the start of rock ‘n’ roll from earlier releases that used the phrase in this way—Li’l Son Jackson’s “Rockin’ and Rollin’” in 1950 or John Lee Hooker’s “Rock ‘n’ Roll” in the LEARN MORE
Learning objectives 
on MySearchLabCrossing Cultures:  
The Eruption of  Rock ‘n’ Roll
It is ironic that the term rock ‘n’ roll, 
eventually used by many white r&b dee-
jays to give rhythm and blues a more 
wholesome veneer, had been common 
in African American music for years as a slang term for the sexual act.
82 ROC k IN ’ O u Tsame year; Wynonie Harris’s hit recording of Roy Brown’s “Good Rockin’ Tonight” in 1948 
or Sister Rosetta Tharpe’s “Rock Me” (with the Lucky Millinder Orchestra) in 1942. For that matter, one could go back to Trixie Smith’s 1922 recording of “My Daddy Rocks Me (With 
One Steady Roll).” Tosches, taking the exercise to the extreme, has traced the sexual origins of 
the phrase back to medieval times.
4 Suffice it to say (lest we get lost in history), that the music 
that came to be called rock ‘n’ roll began in the 1950s, as diverse and seldom-heard segments 
of the population achieved a dominant voice in mainstream culture and transformed the very 
concept of what was popular music.
Cultural Diversity: The Roots of Rock ‘n’ Roll
In an age in which the virtues of multiculturalism challenge the limitations of a narrowly 
 Eurocentric worldview, it is fashionable to focus self-righteously on the culturally diverse influ-ences that gave birth to rock ‘n’ roll. 
u
nquestionably, rock ‘n’ roll was profoundly multicultural, 
but any serious analysis of its characteristics should attempt to apportion fairly the influence of 
various cultures. 
u
nfortunately, the origins of rock ‘n’ roll are often described in a way that could 
be represented by an algebraic formula: r&b + c&w = r&r. The formula is elegant in its simplicity and not without an element of truth—rhythm and blues and country and western (c&w) were  the 
primary styles that gave birth to rock ‘n’ roll—but it suffers from a number of shortcomings that can easily distort the contributions of participating groups. The limited focus on broad marketing categories, coded as black and white, avoids crucial issues of class, ethnicity, and gender and also ignores the myriad of influences that comprise rhythm and blues and country and western them-selves, as well as other stylistic elements that exist outside these categories. In such a narrow for-
mulation, Latinos, for example, can easily be erased from rock ‘n’ roll history, even though almost all descriptions of the music, including those cited below, mention Latin influences prominently.
Clearly, rock ‘n’ roll resulted from a complex interplay of social and cultural forces that 
cannot be reduced to a simple formula. As Robert Palmer has noted:
The cliché is that rock & roll was a melding of country music and blues, and if you are talking about, 
say, Chuck Berry or Elvis Presley, the description, though simplistic, does fit. But the black inner-city vocal-group sound . . . had little to do with either blues or country music in their purer forms.
The Bo Diddley beat . . . was Afro-Caribbean in derivation. The most durable . . . bass riff 
in Fifties rock & roll . . . had been pinched . . . from a Cuban son record. The screaming, athletic saxophone playing . . . was straight out of Forties big-band swing. . . . Traditional Mexican  
rhythms entered the rock & roll arena through Chicano artists. . . . Rock & roll proved an 
 
All-American, multi-ethnic hybrid, its sources and developing substyles too various to be explained 
away by “blues plus country” or any other reductionist formula.5
Attempting to avoid this reductionism, George Lipsitz has located rock ‘n’ roll at the 
intersection of urbanization, multiculturalism, and class:
Workers drawn to cities by the manpower needs of American industry retained elements from 
their traditional cultures, but also combined with others to form a polyglot, urban, working-class culture. The social meanings previously conveyed in isolation by blues, country, polka, zydeco, and 
 C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 83Latin musics found new expression as they blended in an urban setting. . . . Rock and Roll music 
accelerated and intensified the interactions among ethnic groups, becoming the most visible expres-sion of the increasing commonality of working-class experience.
6
A final limitation of the algebraic formula: from it, one might infer that r&b and c&w con-
tributed equally to the new genre. Such an inference invariably undervalues the African 
 
American 
contribution. When rock ‘n’ roll erupted full-blown in the national pop market in 1956, it presented 
itself as an integrated phenomenon with performers such as Bill Haley and Elvis 
 
Presley sharing 
the stage equally with artists like Fats Domino, Little Richard, and Chuck Berry. 
 
Accordingly, 
Steve Perry painted the early history of rock ‘n’ roll in racially glowing terms: “From 1955–1958, 
the roster of popular rock ‘n’ rollers was more racially equal than at any time before or since. Chuck Berry, Little Richard, the Coasters, the Platters, Fats Domino, Lloyd Price—
 
major stars 
all, and on a rough par with the likes of Bill Haley, Jerry Lee Lewis, and Buddy Holly.”7 But this 
only happened after it had begun to expand to disruptive proportions among mainstream fans. As 
Greil Marcus correctly points out: “Most of the first rock ‘n’ roll styles were variations on black 
forms that had taken shape before the white audience moved in.”8
The athletic, honking saxophone, reminiscent of Illinois Jacquet (“Flying Home”) and 
Big Jay McNeely, found its way into rock ‘n’ roll through Raymond Hill’s spirited solo on Jackie 
Brenston’s “Rocket 88” in 1951. That classic sound was soon echoed on countless rock ‘n’ roll 
records by towering figures such as Lee Allen and Herb Hardesty in New Orleans and 
k
ing Curtis 
and Sam Taylor in New York. T-Bone Walker (“Call It Stormy Monday”) practically invented 
electric blues guitar playing in the 1940s.9 Hailing from Texas, his style involved complex single-
note lines that Robert Palmer has described as “clean, with a terse, dry tone, and minimal vibrato 
and sustain.”10 Walker had an obvious effect on Memphis-based B. B. k ing (“Three O’Clock 
Blues,” “The Thrill Is Gone”), whose bent notes and vocal-like melodies influenced generations of 
rock guitarists. Chuck Berry merged Walker’s approach with those of jazzman Charlie Christian 
and Louis Jordan accompanist Carl Hogan to create the definitive rock ‘n’ roll guitar style and 
mixed in universal odes to teenage life: “School Day,” “Rock ‘n’ Roll Music,” and “Sweet Little Sixteen.” This list of influences does not even include Muddy Waters (“Rolling Stone”), who “electrified” country blues in Chicago so he could be heard above the din in noisy juke joints. Shortly thereafter, Bo Diddley (“Bo Diddley,” “Say Man”), another Delta-born Chicago transplant, crossed over as a rock ‘n’ roll star with a distinctive Afro-Caribbean variant of the style. New Orleans boogie pianist Professor Longhair, who described his own playing as a “combination of offbeat Spanish beats and calypso downbeats” and “a mixture of rumba, mambo and calypso,” was a major influence on Fats Domino, whose successful r&b career was transformed into rock ‘n’ roll 
legend with hits such as “ Ain’t That a Shame” and “Blueberry Hill.”
11
On the vocal front, the assertiveness of r&b performers such as Joe Turner, Ruth Brown, 
and LaVern Baker helped to create the rock ‘n’ roll style. The emotional intensity of Roy Brown 
(“Good Rockin’ Tonight”), for example, was carried to an extreme in the outrageous antics of 
archetypal rock ‘n’ roll screamer Little Richard (“Tutti-Frutti,” “Long Tall Sally,” “Rip It 
u
p”). 
The jazz/gospel fusions of Ray Charles (“Hallelujah, I Love Her So,” “I Got a Woman”) and the 
more pop-oriented gospel stylings of vocalists like Clyde McPhatter (“Treasure of Love,” “ A Lover’s Question”) and Sam Cooke (“You Send Me”) brought the traditions of the black church 84 ROC k IN ’ O u Tinto the secular world of rock ‘n’ roll. The elegant harmonies of urban vocal harmony groups 
like the Orioles (“Crying in the Chapel”), the Crows (“Gee”), the Chords (“Sh’Boom”), and the Penguins (“Earth Angel”) ushered in a whole subgenre of rock ‘n’ roll known as doo wop.
Therefore, in the well-intentioned and largely accurate celebration of rock ‘n’ roll’s mon-
grel character, it is important not to lose sight of the fact that most of its formative influences, 
as well as almost all of its early innovators, were African American. Among the artists who could have been considered rock ‘n’ roll musicians prior to 1955, there was only one white act that made a national impact—Bill Haley and His Comets.
Perhaps the most disturbing thing about the revolution that was 
rock ‘n’ roll was that it just about eliminated women from the ranks of the best-selling recording artists. In the years immediately preceding rock ‘n’ roll, female vocalists had accounted for up to one-third of the 
best-selling singles in a given year, singing in the pop Tin Pan Alley 
mold—Patti Page (“Doggie in the Window,” 1953), 
k
itty 
k
allen (“Little Things Mean a Lot,” 
1954), Rosemary Clooney (“Hey There,” 1954), Doris Day (“Secret Love,” 1954), and Mary Ford, whose multitracked vocals featured on the string of hits she made with her guitar-ist husband, Les Paul (“How High the Moon,” 1951; “Vaya con Dios,” 1953). By 1957, how-ever, only two women appeared on Cashbox’s list of the twenty-five best-selling records of the year—Debbie Reynolds (“Tammy”) and Jane Morgan (“Fascination”)—and none of the eighteen or so rock ‘n’ roll records on the list was by a woman. The breakdown for the fol-lowing year was exactly the same, unless Connie Francis’s recording of “Who’s Sorry Now” is counted as rock ‘n’ roll. Occasionally, female performers did penetrate the weekly best-seller lists with rock ‘n’ roll material—LaVern Baker’s “Tweedlee Dee” in 1955 and “Jim Dandy” in 
1957 and Ruth Brown’s “Lucky Lips” in 1957—but a pattern of overwhelming male domina-
tion prevailed.
Clearly, the sexuality that characterized rock ‘n’ roll’s initial burst of energy was male 
sexuality. With rare exceptions, women did not sing; they were sung about, most often ad -
dressed as “baby,” as in Ivory Joe Hunter’s “Since I Met You Baby” (1956) or Elvis Presley’s “Baby, Let’s Play House” (1955). Young male rock ‘n’ rollers were caught between the ma-cho posturing of the “Sixty Minute Man” with his “Great Balls of Fire” and passionate, even vulnerable, declarations of unconditional romantic love, delivered in teenage idiom. Accord-ingly, a woman could be portrayed as a “Party Doll,” a promiscuous “Butterfly,” or a “Devil in Disguise,” or, alternatively, as a heavenly goddess, “Venus” or “Diana,” a “Dream Lover” with “ Angel Eyes” sent to Earth by a “Little Star” or a “Blue Moon.” At best, women were treated as totally dependent creatures or ideal, unreal apparitions, perched high atop celestial pedestals. Rarely were they seen as normal human beings or “real” people.
Structural Changes in the Music Industry
Whatever else may be said about rock ‘n’ roll, in the early 1950s, the appearance in the 
 mainstream market of African American artists recording rhythm and blues for independent labels turned all the music industry rules upside down—especially those concerning artist 
Perhaps the most disturbing thing 
about the revolution that was rock 
‘n’ roll was that it just about elimi-
nated women from the ranks of 
the best-selling recording artists.
 C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 85and repertoire, recording techniques, 
marketing strategies, national distribu-tion, and consumer preference. In 1953, 
for example, the Orioles, a black group 
originally from Baltimore, recorded “Crying in the Chapel,” a sentimental country song, for Jubilee, an indepen-dent record label. Although three other versions of the song were on various best-seller lists at the time, the Orioles’ 
release, with its sparse accompaniment, a slight gospel tinge, and wordless falsetto swoops in the background, went to number one on the r&b charts and then crossed over to the pop 
 
market. According to Charlie Gillett, lead singer Sonny Til sounded “appealingly strange” to 
the general popular music audience without sounding overtly “black,” a combination of quali-ties that allowed the Orioles’ record to break into the white market and so establish a prec-edent for independently produced records featuring African American artists.
12
Prior to this, the major labels had dominated the mainstream 
market. Estimates indicate that in 1948 and 1949, RCA, CBS, Decca, 
and Capitol released more than 80 percent of all the weekly Top Ten 
hits.13 Marketing categories were simple, narrow, and limiting: pop 
for the national market, country and western for the regional mar-
ket, and rhythm and blues for the African American market. In one 
blow, rock ‘n’ roll swept away this conventional wisdom.
The major labels maintained their hold on the market in 
part because they controlled the entire production process—from songwriting to pressing to 
 
distribution, and in some cases, retail sales; these were in-house functions performed under a 
strict division of labor. Independent labels born in the 1940s and 1950s had far less organized systems, but two events permitted them to compete successfully. First, several 
 
independent radio 
stations, desperate for inexpensive programming, were created as the 
 
Federal 
 
Communications 
Commission (FCC) cleared away its backlog of World War II–era license applications. Second was the development of the 45 rpm record, whose light weight and 
 
durable construction made 
them far cheaper to ship than the 78 rpm records they replaced. As a result, 
 
national distribu-
tion became a viable and cost-effective option for independent 
 
companies. These labels began 
to supply independent radio stations with their records, thus introducing specialty music to the 
mainstream market.After Sonny Til and the Orioles crossed over into the 
mainstream market in 1953, the floodgates opened for African American artists produced by independent 
labels. This new trend in popular music took the estab-
lished powers of the music industry totally by surprise.
Marketing categories were simple, 
narrow, and limiting: pop for the na-
tional market, country and western for 
the regional market, and rhythm and 
blues for the African American market. In one blow, rock ‘n’ roll swept away this conventional wisdom.
86 ROC k IN ’ O u TFollowing the decline of network radio in the early 1950s, ownership patterns in 
 
independent broadcasting began to change from individual stations to “chains”—individ-
ually programmed stations under one corporate roof. Chain owners were businesspeople 
for whom radio was just another investment. Said George Storer, the president of Storer 
Broadcasting,
If the legend still persists that a radio station is some kind of art center, a technical museum, or a 
little piece of Hollywood transplanted strangely to your home town, then the first official act of the second quarter century [of commercial broadcasting] should be to list it along with the local dair -
ies, laundries, banks, restaurants, and filling stations.
14
Of course, these businesspeople expected their investments to be profitable; therefore, pro-
gramming not only had to be inexpensive but also had to appeal to a wide range of listen -
ers. In addition to the specialty markets that the personality jocks had tapped, mainstream 
tastes could not be discounted, nor could the now-burgeoning youth market. Todd Storz 
and Gordon McLendon, both chain owners, found the solution to this dilemma in a new format that placed the forty best-selling records in constant rotation all day long. This was Top Forty radio.
Numerous stories exist about how Top Forty came into being. One has its origin as a 
cost-cutting measure at Storz’s WTIX in New Orleans in 1953, with McLendon’s 
k
LIF in 
 
Dallas following soon after.
15 A more dramatic story has the format’s birth in Omaha,  Nebraska, 
when Storz and Bill Stewart, his program director at 
k
OWH, noticed that bar patrons played 
the same jukebox song over and over. When a cocktail waitress—subjected to the song all 
day—selected it yet again at closing time, a new format was born. The Top Forty format was 
essentially an on-air jukebox, Your Hit Parade, programmed daily and with records. As a total “sound,” Top Forty radio integrated jingles, special effects, promotional gimmicks, and hourly news broadcasts into the music program. The format proved so successful that it soon domi -
nated pop radio.
With Top Forty radio, the deejay became a replaceable element in a total sound formula. 
Naturally the personality jocks railed against the increasing rationalization. George “Hound Dog” Lorenz, the most popular deejay in Buffalo, left W
k
BW because, he said, “[t]his concept 
of radio programming is helping to kill the single-record business, is lowering radio listener-
ship, and is decreasing a new artist’s chances of making it.”16 To many, the new format would 
inevitably restrict audience access to new music, and over time it did just that. In its initial 
stages, though, the format had precisely the opposite effect. According to Richard Peterson, 
“[b]ecause the charts were based not only on radio airplay but also on jukebox play and record 
sales, many r&b records as well as some country music records charted. Thus, for the first time, these sorts of records began to receive wide exposure via the radio.”
17 Imagine hearing 
Little Richard’s “Long Tall Sally,” Patti Page’s “ Allegheny Moon,” Carl Perkins’s “Blue Suede 
Shoes,” and Morris Stoloff ’s “Moonglow and Theme from Picnic,” all on the same radio sta-
tion—indeed, on the same show. It was possible in June 1956, when all four recordings were in 
the Top Forty simultaneously. In the heyday of rock ‘n’ roll, a greater diversity of music was heard on the radio than ever before. C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 87Sounds of the Cities
While it is always tempting to trace the roots of rock ‘n’ roll to the 
South, the music issued from just about every region of the country. The one thing that can be said with certainty is that rock ‘n’ roll was 
an urban sound. Beyond that, the music often owed its characteristic 
sound to the magical ingredients of some bewitching musical brew—the distinctiveness of a particular region or city; the exceptional qual-ity of a specific recording studio or record company; a unique vocal or instrumental style; even the creative genius of a particular writer, performer, producer, and/or engineer.
New Orleans: The Fertile Crescent of Rock ‘n’ Roll
New Orleans was one of those places where diverse musical elements gelled. The Crescent City 
had been home to people from widely varied backgrounds—French, Spanish, African, English, Native American, Cajun, and Creole—for many years before it was purchased by the 
u
nited States 
in 1803. The resulting cultural blend, born of conflict and accommodation, gave the city a distinc-
tive cuisine, language, architecture, and musical culture. 
k
nown in legend as the birthplace of jazz,  
New Orleans was the site of a thriving r&b scene in the late 1940s and early 1950s. Langdon 
 
Winner described the wealth of musical sources that informed the city’s rock ‘n’ roll, which 
 
included “the fabulous ensemble playing of the black funeral bands, the syncopated ‘second line’ 
rhythms of Mardi Gras parades, the rugged country blues from the surrounding Mississippi delta, the raucous chords of barrelhouse piano players, [and] the elegant styles of jazz improvisation.”
18
An Italian American jukebox operator named Cosimo Matassa, co-owner and chief engi-
neer of J&M Studio, was a key figure in the construction of the New Orleans sound. From the 
1940s until the late 1960s, almost every r&b record cut in New Orleans was recorded in one of 
his studios. Matassa’s productions had no overdubbing, multitracking, or electronic embellish-
ments. His style was best described by drummer Earl Palmer, who called Matassa a “genius”:
I’ve seen engineers use two dozen mikes to get the sound he got with three. He knew how to posi-
tion mikes and he knew each mike like it was a person. Didn’t even have no mike on the drums, just a mike on the bass and piano, one on the vocal, and the one that [saxophonists] Tyler and Lee used was pointed at the drums. Cosimo knew that room.
19
With this finely tuned approach and a stable of brilliant sidemen, Matassa created classic New 
Orleans rock ‘n’ roll—heavy on bass and drums, light on horns and piano, with a strong vocal lead—that had independent labels flocking to New Orleans to record.
The first label to use Matassa’s studio, in 1947, was De Luxe from New Jersey. Roy 
Brown’s recording for De Luxe of “Good Rockin’ Tonight” (a rock ‘n’ roll classic) was outsold 
by Wynonie Harris’s that same year, but Brown’s record turned the industry spotlight on New Orleans. Brown wrote the tune during a performing stint at a Galveston, Texas, brothel called the Club Grenada, and its streetwise lyrics popularized the term “rockin’” “as a more musical, 
The music often owed its characteris-
tic sound to the magical ingredients of 
some bewitching musical brew—the 
distinctiveness of a particular region 
or city; the exceptional quality of a specific recording studio or record 
 
company; a unique vocal or instrumen-
tal style; even the creative genius of a 
particular writer, performer, producer, and/or engineer.
88 ROC k IN ’ O u Tgood-time catchall.”20 He became a significant influence on the vocal styles of artists from 
B. B. 
k
ing and Bobby Bland to Jackie Wilson, the young James Brown, and Little Richard.
The city’s fine array of session musicians was another essential ingredient in the creation 
of the New Orleans sound. At the center of this pool of talented sidemen was writer, producer, 
manager, arranger, trumpet player, and bandleader Dave Bartholomew. The son of a respected Dixieland tuba player, Bartholomew was mentored by many leading New Orleans musicians be-fore starting his own band in the late 1940s. From that point on, he maintained a stable of first-rate musicians that included drummers Charles Williams and Earl Palmer, whose syncopated bass-drum style helped define the rock ‘n’ roll backbeat, and saxophonists Herb Hardesty, Red Tyler, and Lee Allen. Bartholomew and his band enjoyed steady live work, but their most influ-ential performances occurred at Matassa’s studio. They can be heard as backup on Lloyd Price’s “Lawdy Miss Clawdy” (1952); Shirley and Lee’s “I’m Gone” (1952); and Smiley Lewis’s “I Hear 
You 
k
nocking” (1955), with Huey “Piano” Smith on piano. Bartholomew’s biggest successes were 
with Fats Domino, for whom he acted as mentor, manager, co-writer, arranger, and producer.
Antoine “Fats” Domino was born in New Orleans in 1928. Taught to play piano by his 
brother-in-law, Domino quit school at eleven and began performing in his teens, first at his family’s Sunday house parties and then graduating to clubs like the Hideaway, where he drew the attention of Dave Bartholomew and Lew Chudd, founder of the Los Angeles-based 
 
Imperial 
Records, who was in New Orleans looking for talent.21 Domino’s music can be identified by his 
warm, inviting French Creole accent; Bartholomew’s clear, well-constructed arrangements; 
and that steady boogie-woogie piano, which dates back to Albert Ammons, Meade Lux Lewis, 
and Pete Johnson, but was influenced most immediately by Professor Longhair.
Domino began recording for Imperial at Matassa’s studio in 1949. His rock ‘n’ roll break-
through came in 1955 when Pat Boone’s version of “ Ain’t That a Shame” went to number one 
on the pop charts and Domino’s original followed it to number ten, establishing him as a full-fledged rock ‘n’ roll star with no change in his r&b style. From 1955 to 1963, well into his thirties, Domino charted thirty-six Top Forty pop hits, more than any other rock ‘n’ roll artist except Elvis Presley (unless Boone, with thirty-eight, is included). In total, nine of 
 
Domino’s 
records entered the Top Ten, including “I’m in Love Again” and “Blueberry Hill” (1956), “Blue Monday” (1957), and “Walking to New 
Orleans” (1960). Never a sex symbol or a musical iconoclast, Domino managed to transcend, to a great degree, the racism that cheated so many other African American artists and the ageism that plagued Bill Haley’s career. Historian John Broven observed of Domino: “Some-how he was rock ‘n’ roll’s safety valve, and all he was putting down 
was good time New Orleans music.”
22 Like Big Joe Turner, Fats Domino was an aging rhythm 
and blues singer who hadn’t changed his style in any appreciable way to accommodate the rock 
‘n’ roll market. Yet, unlike Turner, Domino crossed over to become a major, if unlikely, rock 
‘n’ roll star. Perhaps it was his natural, laid back New Orleans style with its simple production 
values, soothing vocals, and infectious rhythms that made the difference. All of Domino’s hits, with the possible exception of “I’m Walkin’,” were recorded in Matassa’s studio; all were pro-duced and arranged, and most co-written, by Bartholomew; and all used some combination of the same session musicians.Never a sex symbol or a musical icono-
clast, Domino managed to transcend, to 
a great degree, the racism that cheated 
so many other African American artists 
and the ageism that plagued Bill Haley’s career.
 C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 89Interestingly, nobody consolidated the New Orleans sound into a successful New  
Orleans record label in the 1950s. The prodigious output of Matassa’s studio was licensed to out- 
of-state independent labels. Ace Records, headquartered in Jackson, Mississippi, but centered in 
New Orleans, was the closest thing New Orleans had to a local label in the initial surge of rock 
‘n’ roll. Founded in 1955 by Johnny Vincent (Vincent Imbragulio), who had been an artist and repertoire man for Specialty, the company had an immediate success with Earl 
k
ing’s “Those 
Lonely, Lonely Nights.” 
k
ing’s second release, “Well-O, Well-O, Well-O, Baby,” had that rock-
ing New Orleans piano groove made famous by Huey “Piano” Smith. Smith and his band, the Clowns, provided Ace with its first pop hit—“(I Got the) Rockin’ Pneumonia and the Boogie-Woogie Flu” (1957)—with Bobby Marchan as lead vocalist. In 1958, the Clowns hit the pop Top Ten with “Don’t You Just 
k
now It.” Following that, their biggest success was as Frankie 
Ford’s session band on “Sea Cruise.” As Langdon Winner has pointed out, with this 1959 hit, 
“all of the elements of a sound which had been evolving for a decade are carried to their logical extremes. The New Orleans horns finally cook like their lives depend on it. The piano prances along, reaching the very essence of boogie-woogie. The lead vocal finally achieves the perfect mix of pure joke and pure hysteria.”
23
Ace’s original recording had featured Bobby Marchan’s vocal, but the company used 
Frankie Ford in the final release in an attempt to find a teen idol who could compete with white 
rock ‘n’ rollers such as Elvis Presley and Ricky Nelson. This practice was all too common in 
rock ‘n’ roll at the time. To Ford’s credit, he had a genuine feel for r&b, and he delivered the 
song in a style heavily indebted to Marchan. Ace also recorded Jimmy Clanton, another white New Orleans rocker who produced a string of pop hits between 1958 and 1962, including three that made the Top Ten: “Just a Dream,” “Go, Jimmy, Go,” and “Venus in Blue Jeans.” These three, especially the last one, removed him from his New Orleans roots and placed him in the company of ersatz rockers such as Fabian, Frankie Avalon, and Bobby Rydell.
The rest of the music recorded at Matassa’s studio by New Orleans musicians was is-
sued by more distant labels. Clarence “The Frogman” Henry’s “ Ain’t Got No Home,” “But I Do,” and “You Always Hurt the One You Love” were issued by Argo, a subsidiary of Chess in 
Chicago, but the bulk of the material went to Los Angeles–based labels, primarily Aladdin, Specialty, and Imperial. Aladdin signed Shirley and Lee (Shirley Goodman and Leonard Lee), whose “Let the Good Times Roll” reached number twenty on the pop charts in 1956. Impe-rial had Smiley Lewis (“I Hear You 
k
nockin’”) and the Spiders (“I Didn’t Want to Do It”), as 
well as Fats Domino, who turned the label into one of the most successful independents in 
the country.
Art Rupe, the owner of Specialty, was so impressed with Domino that he went to New 
 
Orleans in 1952 to find someone who could sing like him. He found seventeen-year-old Lloyd Price, at a public audition at Matassa’s studio. Taken by Price’s rendition of “Lawdy Miss Clawdy,” Rupe put together a band to record it; Bartholomew rounded up the usual sidemen, including Fats Domino on piano. The record went to number one on the r&b charts and was 
followed by two more Top Ten r&b hits—“Restless Heart” (1952) and “ Ain’t That a Shame” 
(1953). Before Price could hit his stride, however, he was drafted into the army. After his service, he switched to ABC-Paramount and delivered nine Top Forty pop hits, including “Stagger Lee,” “Personality,” and “I’m Gonna Get Married,” numbers one, two, and three, respectively, in 1959.90 ROC k IN ’ O u TAnother Rupe find in New Orleans was Eddie Jones, better known by his stage name, 
Guitar Slim. Slim was one of the most extroverted guitarists of the early 1950s, equally known 
for his outlandish stage antics and his biting guitar tone. At one characteristic appearance, 
recalled Earl 
k
ing, he came out with a blue suit, blue hair, and a 350-foot guitar cord, and was 
carried on the shoulders of a large valet through the crowd and out the club into the street.24 
As a player, Guitar Slim pushed amplification to an extreme well before doing so was standard, 
laying the groundwork for the high volume and feedback that would characterize rock guitar 
in years to come. His tendencies toward excess made him difficult to record, but he created one 
true hit with Specialty, “The Things I 
u
sed to Do” (1954), which featured an arrangement by a 
rising r&b star named Ray Charles.
Rupe’s efforts to replace Lloyd Price, meanwhile, led him to Little Richard (née Richard  
Penniman), soon to become the most colorful figure in rock ‘n’ roll. Richard hailed from 
 
Macon, Georgia, where he sang and learned to play piano in the Pentecostal church before  
being forced to leave home because of alleged homosexual activity. In 1951, he landed a record-ing contract with RCA Victor, which failed to ignite his career, much like his next contract with Peacock. Around the same time, he began hanging out with Esquerita, a flamboyant gay 
performer who influenced Richard as much with his outrageous sense of style as his brilliant piano playing.
25 Later, Art Rupe bought out Richard’s contract from Peacock for $600 and sent 
him and producer Bumps Blackwell to New Orleans to record for Specialty. Naturally, they 
went to Matassa’s studio and used Bartholomew’s sidemen. During a break in the session, 
when the musicians went to the nearby Dew Drop Inn, Richard played an energetic tune laced 
with obscenity called “Tutti Frutti” that had been a crowd-pleaser in his live performances. Blackwell quickly brought in Dorothy La Bostrie, a local songwriter, to clean up the lyrics, and with fifteen minutes of studio time left, “Tutti Frutti” was recorded.
26 It hit number twenty-one 
on the pop charts in 1956 and established Little Richard as the most outrageous rock ‘n’ roller 
of them all.
Little Richard turned out eight other Top Forty pop hits for Specialty, including “Long 
Tall Sally” and “Slippin’ and Slidin’” (1956), “Lucille” and “
k
eep a 
k
nockin’” (1957), and “Good 
Golly, Miss Molly” (1958). Each was as unrestrained as the one before it. By drummer Earl 
Palmer’s account, the pounding backbeat he maintained on Richard’s early material came from “trying to match Richard’s right hand” on the piano, which abandoned the more traditional shuffle rhythm for a harder, 
Perhaps more than any other artist, Little 
Richard unleashed the energy of early rock ‘n’ roll. On a number of occasions Richard 
left the world of music to pursue a higher 
calling. Fortunately for rock ‘n’ roll, however, his uncontrollable style and irrepressible spirit always won out in the end. C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 91
Listening Guide 6“Tutti Frutti”
Artist:
 
Little Richard
Music/Lyrics by Little Richard  
(and Dorothy La Bostrie)
Label:
 
Specialty (1956)Little Richard’s first hits were recorded in Cosimo Matassa’s famous 
studio in New Orleans with Dave Bartholomew’s band, the same musicians 
who can be heard on recordings of Fats Domino and other New Orleans 
 
luminaries. “Tutti Frutti” hadn’t been on the docket for that particular 
 
recording session, but Richard started singing it during a break:
A wop-bop-a-loo-mop, a good goddamn,  
Tutti frutti . . . good booty . . . .
Producer Bumps Blackwell decided that it would make a great single, 
once the lyrics were cleaned up (in addition to the obvious, tutti frutti was a contemporary slang term for a gay man). The 
task of rewriting the lyrics was given to Dorothy La Bostrie, an aspiring young New Orleans songwriter. The result was the now-famous “A wop-bop-a-loo-mop, a lop bam boom, Tutti Frutti—oh Rootie. . . .” “Tutti Frutti” was the first big hit for 
 
Richard and reached the Top Ten on both the r&b charts and the pop charts.
Musical Style Notes
“Tutti Frutti” is a classic twelve-bar blues structure. The last four bars of each verse are generally played as a stop time 
chorus: The band hits only the downbeat of each bar, highlighting the singer’s lines. The last two bars of each verse fea-ture the “wop-bop-a-loo-mop, a lop bam boom” line.
Vocal cues are an important part of Little Richard’s style. If you listen to several of Richard’s songs in a row, you’ll 
notice that there’s a particular “scream” that always cues in an instrumental solo verse.
In some ways, Little Richard is Fats Domino’s alter ego: Both played piano; both artists’ records featured the 
same New Orleans–style instrumental combination, with its emphasis on sax and boogie-influenced piano rather than 
guitar; and both artists wrote accessible, catchy pop tunes. However, Fats’s elegant New Orleans gentleman persona and 
smooth vocals were the polar opposite of Richard’s outrageous stage presence and his manic yips and howls.92 ROC k IN ’ O u T
Listening Guide 6Musical “Road Map”
TIMINGS COMMENTS
0:00–0:03 Begins with Little Richard’s famous nonsense-syllable refrain, unaccompanied.
The band stops each time this refrain is sung throughout the song, except for the lead into the sax 
solo (see below).
0:03–0:19 “Tutti frutti” verse
12-bar blues form, the last 2 bars of which are the “wop-bop-a-loo-mop”Note drum “pickup” to next verse—in other words, the drummer anticipates the next verse by starting 
a beat before the verse begins.
0:19–0:34 Verse 1
12-bar blues form; last 4 measures are a “stop-time” chorus.
0:35–0:50
0:37–0:39“Tutti frutti” verse, as beforeRichard’s trademark squeal and high-pitched “wooo”
0:50–1:05 Verse 2, same form as Verse 1
1:05–1:201:18“Tutti frutti” verse, as before, with one exception:Listen to the way the drummer plays “A wop-bop-a-loo-mop” with Richard, then does a drum roll to lead 
into the sax solo.
Richard also leads into the sax solo with a scream, one of his favorite cueing techniques.
1:20–1:36 Sax solo over the 12-bar blues form of a verse.Listen to the drummer “ride” the high-hat cymbal; you won’t hear this in Pat Boone’s version.
1:36–1:51 “Tutti frutti” verse
1:51–2:07 Verse 2, same form as Verse 1
2:07–2:232:11“Tutti frutti” verseRichard’s trademark high-pitched “wooo” (copied later by Paul McCartney)Song ends with Richard’s unaccompanied “A wop-bop-a-loo-mop, alop bam boom.” C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 93straighter sort of time keeping.27 Richard’s outrageous personal appearance was the perfect 
complement to his uninhibited stage act. The eye-popping costumes, exaggerated pompadour, 
and heavy mascara defined a rock ‘n’ roll image with which few could compete. His stage antics 
would later be rivaled only by Jerry Lee Lewis; his fashion statement (minus the eye makeup) 
only by Elvis Presley. If Fats Domino was rock ‘n’ roll’s safety valve, Little Richard was the steam that made it blow. In describing the difference between the two, Arnold Shaw also noted the versatility of the New Orleans sound itself:
Fats had a friendly baritone and Little Richard’s sound was strident and slam-bam. Fats’ Cajun-
inflected speech had an appealing musicality; Little Richard was a shouter. For Fats, the band played New Orleans jazz with an after beat while he boogied and barrelhoused at the piano. With Little Richard’s crashing piano triplets, the band picked up drive and went “a-womp-bomp-
 
 
a-loo-bomp a-lomp bomp boom” and “bama lama bama loo.” 28
Little Richard’s career came to an abrupt halt in 1958 when he unexpectedly quit the 
business to join the ministry. Rupe blamed the first Russian satellite: “He thought that the 
Sputnik was a sign from heaven. That was it.”29 However, Richard himself attributed his deci-
sion to a timely visit to his Los Angeles home in 1957 by Brother Wilbur Gulley, a missionary for the Church of God of the Ten Commandments.
30 Like other early rock and rollers—Jerry 
Lee Lewis in particular—Richard had long been torn between his evangelical faith and his at-traction to worldly things. He also saw the ministry as a way to escape the mounting pressures 
of his successful career and what he perceived as unfair treatment at the hands of Rupe. Richard 
would continue to move between rock music and the ministry for the remainder of his career, but his sudden withdrawal in 1958 was one of a number of fateful occurrences in the late 1950s that signaled the decline of rock ‘n’ roll’s first wave.
Los Angeles: From Jump Blues to Chicano Rock
The independent labels in Los Angeles in the late 1940s sought to satisfy the cultural needs of 
the poor white, black, and Chicano migrants who had come to work in the shipyards and air -
plane manufacturing plants. Many artists who first recorded for these labels were pioneers in 
the transition from big band jazz to various styles of r&b. The first-wave artists—Roy 
 
Milton, 
Amos Milburn, T-Bone Walker, and Charles Brown, among others—came from Texas. In 
Los Angeles, they encountered local jazz–turned–r&b musicians like Joe Liggins and Johnny Otis, who helped to shape their sound. As a new wave of immigrants arrived from 
 
Southern 
 
Louisiana, Los Angeles’ independent labels began to explore the music of New Orleans. Per-
haps they did so because New Orleans’ early jazz sound, steeped in the blues, resonated well with the transition from jazz to rhythm and blues that was then occurring. Johnny Otis 
 
recalled 
that the big band sound and format was integral to his own approach and that of West Coast peers like Roy Milton, T-Bone Walker, and Joe Liggins. When it became impossible to maintain 
a big band for economic reasons, Otis and other Southern California bandleaders still tried to maintain the general jazz band sound, mixing reduced horn sections with guitar and rhythm instruments. According to Otis, superimposing the bop and swing riffs played by the horns If Fats Domino was rock ‘n’ roll’s safety 
valve, Little Richard was the steam that 
made it blow.
94 ROC k IN ’ O u Tonto the “country blues and boogie structure began to become rhythm and blues. And out of 
rhythm and blues grew rock ‘n’ roll.”31
Even before Fats Domino and Little Richard recorded with some semblance of the 
big band sound, as Otis called it, Roy Milton (Specialty), T-Bone Walker (Imperial), Amos 
 
Milburn (Aladdin), and Joe Liggins and the Honeydrippers (Exclusive) had developed distinc-
tive regional variants of Louis Jordan’s jump blues. Charles Brown, the lead singer for Johnny 
Moore’s Three Blazers, developed a smooth r&b style that was heavily influenced by Nat “
k
ing” Cole and Leroy Carr in “Driftin’ Blues” (Aladdin, 1948) and “Merry Christmas, Baby” 
(Modern, 1949).
Only Johnny Otis, however, was able to make the successful transition to rock ‘n’ roll. 
After moving to Los Angeles in the early 1940s, he started his own big band, whose first hit, “Harlem Nocturne” (1945), was on Excelsior, a subsidiary of Exclusive, then one of the only black-owned labels in Los Angeles. Otis was also part owner of the Barrel House, an r&b club in Los Angeles, and had a daily radio show and a weekly television show. The Johnny Otis 
Show, a traveling “rhythm and blues caravan,” as he called it, featured vocalists Little Esther and Mel Walker, and their recordings included fifteen Top Forty r&b hits between 1950 and 1952.
32 He is credited with discovering Hank Ballard, Little Willie John, Jackie Wilson, and 
Etta James. He also produced Johnny Ace33 (“Pledging My Love,” 1955), as well as Willie Mae 
“Big Mama” Thornton, for whom he claimed he co-wrote the original version of “Hound Dog” 
with Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller. Otis hit rock ‘n’ roll pay dirt with “Willie and the Hand 
Jive” (1958), a novelty song played to the “Bo Diddley” beat, an Afro-Caribbean clave rhythm 
that Otis said he had learned twenty years earlier.
Otis was such an important catalyst for African American culture and talent that 
people are sometimes surprised to learn that he was white. Otis identified himself as “black by persuasion.” When speaking of African Americans, he used the pronoun we  and did so 
with credibility. “My friend, Johnny Otis, is genetically white, but in all other respects completely black,” wrote black musician Preston Love in the preface to Listen to the Lambs, a book Otis wrote after the Watts rebellion in 1965. “His life has been that of a black man joined with other black men to combat the outside—the hostile and unjust white 
establishment.”
34
Robert Byrd was one of the musicians at the Barrel House. In 1957, Byrd (as Bobby Day, 
one of several pseudonyms) wrote and recorded “Little Bitty Pretty One” for the Class label, 
owned by Otis and Leon René. Aladdin put out a nearly identical version of the song, with 
Thurston Harris, which Dick Clark selected for American Bandstand. It outsold Day’s original, 
four to one. The following year, René, who had written “When the Swallows Come Back to Capistrano” as the B-side of Day’s record, wrote another “bird” song for Day. “Rockin’ Robin” (1958) went to number two on the pop charts and became one of the all-time classic rock ‘n’ roll records.
Given the historic presence of its Chicano residents, it was only 
a matter of time until Los Angeles musicians began incorporating the sounds of Mexico and the Southwest into rock ‘n’ roll. Johnny Otis anticipated this move when he presented Li’l Julian Herrera at the El 
Monte Legion Stadium in 1956. Herrera was actually Hungarian born 
Given the historic presence of its 
 
Chicano residents, it was only a matter 
of time until Los Angeles musicians be-
gan incorporating the sounds of Mexico 
and the Southwest into rock ‘n’ roll.
 C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 95but raised by Chicano parents. He had a major local hit with “Lonely, Lonely Nights,”  co-written 
with Otis. “It’s an elegant and beautiful doo wop ballad, very much in the black style,” Rubén 
Guevara has written, “but something about it—the accent, the voice, the attitude— made it 
 different. It was Chicano rock.”
35 In the hands of the Champs (“Tequila”) and Ritchie Valens (“La 
Bamba”), the sound of Chicano rock would extend to up-tempo rock ‘n’ roll by the end of the 
decade and develop further in the years to come. (It is dealt with in more detail in the section on 
Latin influences in this chapter and the section on Chicano rock in Chapter 6.)
Chicago: The Blues Electrified
Chicago was one of the main watering holes for urbanized blues musicians from the  Mississippi 
Delta, including Big Bill Broonzy, Sonny Boy Williamson, Willie Mabon, Jimmy Reed, John 
Lee Hooker, Muddy Waters, and Howlin’ Wolf. All of them, except Broonzy, recorded for 
 Chicago’s two main independent record labels, Chess (Williamson, Mabon, Waters, and Wolf), 
and Vee Jay (Reed and Hooker).
According to legend, many of the Chicago blues greats simply walked into Chess 
 
Records 
off the street. Leonard Chess, however, was not one to sit and wait for talent to come to him. He made regular trips to the South to find bluesmen. On one trip, he recorded Howlin’ Wolf with Ike Turner on piano and James Cotton on harp. On another, in 1951, Chess acquired Jackie Brenston’s recording of “Rocket 88,” with Turner’s band and Brenston singing lead, from Sam Phillips, who later founded Sun Records. The song rocketed to the top of the r&b charts and 
 
inspired Bill Haley to move in an r&b direction. Indeed, “Rocket 88” is sometimes 
cited as one of the first rock ‘n’ roll records, in part due to the song’s inclusion of a uniquely 
distorted guitar tone. As legend would have it, guitarist Willie 
k
izart’s amplifier fell from the 
band’s car on the way to the studio and broke a speaker cone. The resulting sound was dis-tinctly fuzzy, but producer Phillips liked it and so featured it in the track, adding a saxophone-like heft to 
k
izart’s boogie rhythm line.36
Chess’s pioneering role in advancing rock ‘n’ roll was even more apparent in the label’s 
next two major performers—Bo Diddley and Chuck Berry. Like the early bluesmen who re-
corded for Chess, Bo Diddley came from Mississippi. He moved to Chicago in 1934 but did 
not record for Chess until 1955. 
u
nusually among bluesmen, he studied the violin—not the 
fiddle, but the classical instrument—before switching to guitar. Between 1955 and 1959, he 
turned out eight r&b hits, including the classic “Bo Diddley” (1955) backed with “I’m a Man.” 
In 1959, “Say Man” crossed over to the pop market, and “Crackin’ 
u
p” made the pop charts but 
not the r&b charts, reflecting the beginning of the separation of rock ‘n’ roll from rhythm and 
blues. Diddley’s main influence lay in his rhythmic signature—an Afro-Latin, three-against-two clave-influenced rhythm (also known as the Bo Diddley beat and often misidentified as the shave-and-a-haircut beat)—which was copied by numerous rock ‘n’ rollers. However, he was overshadowed at Chess by the label’s biggest star and possibly the greatest rock ‘n’ roller of 
them all—Chuck Berry.
Were it not for the dynamics of racism in 
u
.S. society, Chuck Berry probably would 
have been crowned king of rock ‘n’ roll. When Berry, the son of a middle-class contractor from St. Louis, Missouri, walked into the offices of Chess Records on the recommendation of 96 ROC k IN ’ O u TMuddy Waters, he was already a seasoned performer from years playing at the  Cosmopolitan 
Club in his native St. Louis in a band that featured (and was originally led by) pianist 
 Johnnie Johnson. The Cosmo drew an unusually integrated audience, and Berry entertained 
them with a mix of blues, pop, and country tunes, the latter sung in a “hard, white” diction 
meant to appeal to the white clientele.
37 He came to Chess with two songs, the slow blues 
“Wee Wee Hours” and the country-infused “Ida Red.” Leonard Chess preferred the latter, 
recommending that Berry give the tune a bigger beat and change the title—which Berry 
did—to “Maybellene,” a name he took either from the popular cosmetics line or from a 
children’s story book.38 Chess passed the record along to Alan Freed, whose promotional 
support helped to make the song—characterized by what Chess described as “the big beat, 
cars, and young love”—a hit.39 For his efforts, Freed and another deejay, Russ Fratto, were 
credited as co-writers of the song, a practice that eventually contributed to the undoing of rock ‘n’ roll.
The country-tinged “Maybellene” went to number five on the pop charts in 1955, but 
some of Berry’s songs were too socially relevant for pop. His next four singles featured a style 
more clearly indebted to blues and found him addressing a range of social issues outlined by Charlie Gillett, including legal troubles and unfair judges (“Thirty Days”), car salesmen and credit (“No Money Down”), cultural authority (“Roll Over Beethoven”), and the wide-ranging “Too Much Monkey Business.” The last of these was actually a two-sided r&b hit, backed with “Brown-Eyed Handsome Man,” a thinly veiled comment on race. By Gillett’s account, the com-bination of Berry’s social criticism of American life and his more strongly defined blues voice led these songs to receive far less attention from disc jockeys than his freewheeling, country-
flavored debut.
40
Berry is best remembered for the simpler, teen-directed but socially relevant record-
ings that came later—“School Day” and “Rock & Roll Music” in 1957, and “Sweet Little 
Sixteen” and “Johnny B. Goode” in 1958. All 
reached the Top Ten on the pop charts. In 
his writing, Berry had the uncanny ability to relate r&b to white teen culture without dis -
owning his blackness, although he sometimes deliberately played to the biases of his audience, as when he changed a key line of “Johnny B. Goode” from “colored boy” to “country boy” to avoid overt mention of race.
41 His “duck walk” HEAR MORE
Chuck Berry on 
MySearchLab
Chuck Berry had it all: sex appeal, talent, wit, stage 
presence, and an incredible ability to relate to teen culture. Had this country been more tolerant of racial 
differences, this “brown-eyed handsome man” would 
probably have been crowned the “King of Rock ‘n’ Roll.”
 C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 97
Chuck Berry’s 1950s singles represent what are in some ways the clearest 
combination of cross-cultural influences of early rock ‘n’ roll: the forms, harmonies, and pounding backbeats of rhythm and blues, and the twangy, 
clear-toned guitar solos of “hot country.” Chuck Berry’s music very much 
represents the musical and cultural boundary-crossing that went on in the music underworlds of Memphis and St. Louis.
Though he played the blues in East St. Louis clubs, Berry had 
clearly listened extensively to country artists as well—as can be heard on 
some of the sides he recorded in Chicago. While the rhythm section holds 
down a solid, behind-the-beat, triplet-laden blues shuffle (“tri-pl-et tri-pl-et tri-pl-et tri-pl-et”), Berry’s twangy guitar solos are in rock-hard straight-eighths (“dunka-DUNKA-dunka-DUNKA”). He never varied from this formula, and there was no reason to: He was the first rock guitar hero, and his twangy solos are the foundation of every young wannabe guitarist’s first education.
Musical Style Notes
The strong drum backbeat, Berry’s repeating guitar riff, and the boogie-woogie piano sound are all typical of 1950s rock 
‘n’ roll style, as is the prominent echo effect. “Rock and Roll Music” begins as a typical twelve-bar blues form, but only the chorus maintains that structure; the verse is actually eight bars long. The lyric verses of “Rock and Roll Music” also 
form an interesting structural overlap with the music. The first line of the verse is actually sung over the last bar (mea-
sure) of the chorus’s twelve-bar blues form. Likewise, the last line of the verse (“That’s why I go for that—”) could be con-sidered the first line of the chorus rather than the words “rock and roll music,” which occur on the downbeat of the first bar of the chorus’s twelve-bar blues form.
Chorus, bar 11 Chorus, bar 12 Verse, bar 1 
 
1
 
2
 
3
 
4
 
1
 
2
 
3
 
4
 
1
 
2
 
3
 
4
if you
 
wanna
 
dance
 
with me —I
 
got no
 
kick a-
 
gainst mo-
  
dern
  
jazz . . .
The overall effect is a very seamless progression through the song; notice that there is no instrumental solo verse to 
interrupt the flow of the words.
Listening Guide 7“Rock and Roll Music”
Artist:
 
Chuck Berry
Music/Lyrics by Chuck Berry
Label:
 
Chess (1958)98 ROC k IN ’ O u TListening Guide 7Musical “Road Map”
TIMINGS COMMENTS
0:00–0:25 Four quick guitar strums, directly into 12-bar chorus.
The lyrics over the last measure are actually the first line of the verse.
0:25–0:37 Verse 1The last line of each verse, which occurs on the last measure, is actually a lead-in to the first line 
of the chorus.
0:37–0:57 Chorus
0:57–1:09 Verse 2
1:09–1:28 Chorus
1:28–1:41 Verse 3
1:41–2:00 Chorus
2:00–2:13 Verse 4
Listen to the way that the drums and percussion change style here, from the rock backbeat to 
a Latin percussion beat; they’re “commenting” on the reference to “tango” and “mambo” in the 
lyrics.
2:13–2:33 Chorus
Rhythmic “tag” at the end—“cha-cha CHA” beat C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 99capitalized on the visual appeal of the electric guitar, while in his 
playing, he put forth one of the signature guitar styles of the era, introducing most of his best-known songs with a variation on a 
trademark mix of single-note and double-stop lines that were me-
lodically inventive and rhythmically propulsive. “ As rock & roll’s first guitar hero,” Nelson George has written, “Berry, along with various rockabilly musi-cians, made that instrument the genre’s dominant musical element, supplanting the sax of previous black stars.”
42
In 1959, Berry was arrested for a violation of the Mann Act (transporting a minor across 
state lines for immoral purposes). The impulse to discredit rock ‘n’ roll was shown in a headline 
of the time: ROC
k
 ‘N’ ROLL SINGER L
u
RED ME TO ST. LO
u
IS, SAYS 14 YEAR OLD.43 
It took two trials to convict him. The first was vacated because of the blatant racism of the judge, who referred to Berry as “this Negro.” The second, which ended in 1962, landed him in 
jail for nearly two years. Despite this, Berry’s songs continued to sell well in 1964 and 1965, 
but his career slipped in the late 1960s. He staged a comeback in 1972 with a song as commer-cially successful as it was puerile—“My Ding-a-Ling,” his first and only number one pop hit. Although other heroes of rock ‘n’ roll may have had more and bigger hits than Chuck Berry, none matched his influence in defining its style.
Chicago’s other main independent label was formed in the early 1950s by an African 
American couple, Vivian Carter and James Bracken; hence its name, Vee Jay. Carter was one of the few women deejays at the time; Bracken owned and operated a record store. Vee Jay had success with both gospel (the Swan Silvertones, the Harmonizing Four, the Highway 
QCs, and the Staple Singers) and doo wop (the Spaniels and the El Dorados). However, its best-selling artist in the 1950s was Delta bluesman Jimmy Reed. Signed to the label in 1953, Reed produced fourteen r&b hits between 1956 and 1961, including “Honest I Do” (1957) and “Baby What You Want Me to Do” (1960), which crossed over to the pop Top Forty. John Lee Hooker joined Vee Jay in 1955 after previously recording for a range of other labels, most notably L.A. independent Modern, for which he issued the classic “Boogie Chillen” (1948). His contract with Vee Jay gave him greater career stability but he did not match the success of his label mate Reed as an r&b artist.
44 He became better known later because of 
his Newport Folk Festival appearances and recordings, which were influential in the blues 
revival of the 1960s.
Vee Jay seemed destined for major success when it signed the Impressions. Gospel 
choir–mates Jerry Butler and Curtis Mayfield joined forces with the core of a group called 
the 
 
Roosters to form the Impressions. The group’s 1958 audition at Vee Jay yielded “For Your 
Precious Love,” which became a Top Twenty pop hit but contributed to the destruction of the group because it was inadvertently credited to Jerry Butler and the Impressions. Butler stayed with Vee Jay as a solo artist, with Mayfield as a writer and arranger; but as recording artists, Mayfield and the rest of the Impressions switched to ABC-Paramount, where Mayfield penned a series of gospel-influenced “sermon songs” (rightfully belonging to the era of the civil rights movement, discussed in Chapter 6). Vee Jay made its mark on rock ‘n’ roll with hits by Dee 
Clark (“Hey Little Girl,” 1959, and “Raindrops,” 1961), Gene Chandler (“Duke of Earl,” 1962), and Betty Everett (“The Shoop Shoop Song [It’s in His 
k
iss],” 1964).In his writing, Berry had the 
uncanny ability to relate r&b to 
white teen culture without dis-
owning his blackness.100  ROC k IN ’ O u TIn terms of offering career direction to African American 
artists and crossing black music over to a white audience, Vee Jay 
could have been what Motown became. 
u
nfortunately, the 
 
company 
seemed to have a knack for losing many of its best acts. Gene 
 
Chandler, for example, signed with Constellation shortly after “Duke 
of Earl” ran its course. While Vee Jay introduced a number of name artists—including the Four Seasons, Gladys 
k
night and the Pips, 
and the Dells—many had their biggest successes after 
 
switching 
to other labels. Even the Beatles were first issued on Vee Jay in the 
u
nited States, when 
 
Capitol 
initially passed on them. In 1966, the company unexpectedly folded amidst rumors of fiscal mismanagement.
Cincinnati: The Crossroads of Blues and Country
A major rail stop situated along the Ohio River, Cincinnati long served as a gateway to Northern 
iron and steel mills for blacks and whites from the South. It was thus a crossroads for blues and country music. As noted in Chapter 3, Syd Nathan’s 
k
ing Records consolidated these influences 
into a diverse musical enterprise. 
u
nder the able direction of producer Henry Glover, Nathan’s pol-
icy of encouraging his artists—country and western and rhythm and blues—to record each other’s 
songs provided early examples of the cultural cross-pollination that would yield rock ‘n’ roll.
Among 
k
ing’s country artists, the Delmore Brothers had first recorded blues-based coun-
try hits (“I’ve Got the Big River Blues”) when they were with RCA. Glover continued the trend, culminating in the 1949 country hit “Blues Stay Away from Me.” His biggest country break-throughs, however, were with Moon Mullican, who scored unorthodox country hits early on with “Shoot the Moon” and an updated version of the Cajun classic “New Jole Blon” (1947), exerting a big impact in the realm of country boogie. “[
u
]nder Glover’s influence,” according 
to historian John W . Rumble, “Mullican expressed his fascination with black music on levels that 
few country artists had ever attained.”45 By the time of his biggest hit, “Cherokee Boogie” (1951), 
he was a star of the Grand Ole Opry and formative influence on the young Jerry Lee Lewis.
African American artist Ivory Joe Hunter moved in the other direction. Hunter had re-
corded a number of early r&b hits for 
k
ing in the late 1940s, such as “Landlord Blues” and 
“I Quit My Pretty Mama.” He achieved pop crossover success with his biggest hit, “Since I Met 
You Baby” in 1956, after leaving 
k
ing for Atlantic, and became one of the few African 
 
American 
artists ever to become a regular on the Grand Ole Opry.
k
ing Records eventually made a direct impact on the rock ‘n’ roll market with three acts: 
the Charms (“Hearts of Stone,” 1954), Bill Doggett’s combo (“Honky Tonk,” 1956), and Little Willie John (“Fever,” 1956). However, 
k
ing’s greatest influence on rock ‘n’ roll was through 
its subsidiary, Federal, set up in the early 1950s with producer Ralph Bass. Bass established 
a personality for the new label with gospel-influenced vocal harmony groups, including Billy 
Ward and the Dominoes, the “5” Royales, Hank Ballard and the Midnighters, and the Famous Flames. These groups, along with others, challenged the perceived morality gap between gos-pel music and rhythm and blues and contributed one of the major strands to the style of rock ‘n’ roll known as doo wop.In terms of offering career direction to 
African American artists and crossing 
black music over to a white audience, 
Vee Jay could have been what Motown 
became. Unfortunately, the company seemed to have a knack for losing many of its best acts. C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 101R&B Sanctified: The Gospel Connection
In the late 1940s, as r&b grew in popularity, gospel music was also on the rise. In the Northeast,  
New York’s Apollo label had Mahalia Jackson, Savoy in Newark had James Cleveland, and 
 Gotham in Philadelphia had the Famous Ward Singers. Three other well-known groups—the 
Dixie Hummingbirds, the Silver Echoes, and the Skylight Singers—recorded for various labels in 
New York City. In the West, the best-known gospel talent, including the Pilgrim Travelers and the Soul Stirrers, appeared on Specialty. Black-owned Peacock Records, founded by Don Robey in Houston, recorded the Five Blind Boys of Mississippi and the Bells of Joy, among others.
46
At the time, there was a sharp distinction between gospel and 
rhythm and blues in the African American community. “[R]hythm 
and blues was felt to be degrading, low,” said Robey, “and not to be 
heard by respectable people.”47 In the early 1950s, however, some gos-
pel-trained singers began to move into the secular world of rhythm 
and blues, retaining a gospel tinge in their use of organs, soaring 
vocals, background choruses, and the call-and-response style. The 
first such group was the Dominoes, founded in 1950 by the multitalented Billy Ward. In 1951, the group had three r&b successes on the Federal label—“Do Something for Me,” “I Am with You,” and “Sixty Minute Man” (featuring Bill Brown’s bass), which became a crossover classic whose sexual lyrics caused no small stir in the gospel community. Two later gospel-flavored releases were the Orioles’ “Crying in the Chapel” and “Shake a Hand” by Faye Adams. Both were released in r&b and country versions, and both lent themselves to various interpretations. “Here for the first time you were not sure exactly what ground you were on,” r&b historian Peter Guralnick has written. “Were these love songs or devotionals? Was the second person 
singular you or You? It was an intentional ambivalence that was to persist.”
48
The Dominoes’ early successes were largely due to the incredible leads of gospel-trained 
Clyde McPhatter. In 1952, McPhatter capped his stay with the group with “Have Mercy Baby,” 
a number one r&b hit. The following year McPhatter formed his own group, the Drifters, while 
the equally talented Jackie Wilson took his place in the Dominoes. The Drifters—all of whom 
had a gospel background—delivered six Top Ten r&b hits for Atlantic between 1953 and 1956, including “Money Honey” and the double-sided hit “Such a Night”/“Lucille.” After McPhatter was drafted in 1955, the group eventually disbanded, later re-forming with new personnel and a totally new sound. McPhatter continued with Atlantic after his service, becoming an r&b and pop sensation with hits such as “Treasure of Love” (1956) and “ A Lover’s Question” (1958), number six on the pop charts. He continued producing hits well into the 1960s.
Atlantic also produced the most influential gospel-tinged vocalist of all—Ray Charles 
Robinson, a.k.a. Ray Charles, a.k.a. “the Genius.” Blinded by glaucoma as a youth, Charles at-
tended the St. Augustine School for the Deaf and the Blind in Florida (where he learned to compose and arrange in Braille), then moved to Seattle. The influences on his music were ab-solutely catholic, ranging from the Five Blind Boys of Mississippi to Chopin, to legendary jazz pianist Art Tatum, to jazz pianist–turned pop vocal stylist Nat “
k
ing” Cole. In Florida, Charles 
had even joined a hillbilly band and learned to yodel. After cutting some forty sides for Swing-
time Records in the late 1940s and early 1950s, he signed with Atlantic in 1952.HEAR MORE
Ray Charles on 
MySearchLabIn the early 1950s, some gospel-
trained singers began to move into 
the secular world of rhythm and blues, 
retaining a gospel tinge in their use of 
organs, soaring vocals, background cho-ruses, and the call-and-response style.102  ROC k IN ’ O u TCharles saw no contradiction between gospel and r&b. “Now I’d been singing spirituals 
since I was three,” he said in his autobiography, “and I’d been hearing the blues for just as long. 
So what could be more natural than to combine them?”49 The Genius began to hit his stride 
with a string of original r&b hits in 1954—“Don’t You 
k
now,” “Come Back Baby,” and the 
gospel-inflected “Hallelujah, I Just Love Her So.” Often he mined the gospel repertory directly 
for new material: “Talkin’ ‘Bout Jesus” became “Talkin’ ‘Bout You”; “This Little Light of Mine” 
became “This Little Girl of Mine.” All the elements of his revolutionary jazz-gospel-r&b fusion were present by the time he released “I Got a Woman” (1954). Historian Brian Ward identified impulses in Charles’ music of this time that were as much political as artistic, observing:
The incorporation of gospel elements into his blues was a means [for Charles] to emerge from the 
shadow of his musical mentors and assert his own voice and individuality. This was what soul, like gospel music, black religion, and for that matter the civil rights struggle, was largely about: affirming individual worth within the context of black collective identity and pride.
50
The style reached its logical conclusion with the release of Charles’s Top Ten classic “What’d I 
Say” (1959), “a culmination of the gospel blues style that Ray Charles had virtually created, an altogether secular evocation of an actual church service, complete with moaning, groaning, and 
speaking in tongues, a joyous celebration of an utterly profane love.”
51
By this time, Jackie Wilson had left the Dominoes to pursue a solo career at Brunswick. 
His first six hits, including “Reet Petite” (1957), “Lonely Teardrops” (1958), and “That’s Why 
(I Love You So)” (1959), were co-written by Berry Gordy, the founder of Motown. Wilson 
demonstrated his incredible versatility and operatic vocal range in 1960 on “ Alone at Last” 
and “Night,” both of which hit the Top Ten. In 1967, he was still straddling the narrow line 
that separated gospel from rhythm and blues. His last Top Ten pop hit, “(Your Love 
k
eeps Lifting Me) Higher and 
Higher,” projected the same sexual/spiritual ambiguity that made the fusion so exciting in the first place.
52
Perhaps the most profound gos-
pel desertion was Sam Cooke’s. Son of a 
Chicago Baptist minister, Cooke joined 
the Soul Stirrers in 1950 and quickly 
With musical tastes ranging from Chopin 
to Nat “King” Cole, Ray Charles was a pioneer of the r&b/gospel fusion that has 
come to be known as rhythm and gospel. 
For many, his spirited live performances were, indeed, a religious experience.
 C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 103became, according to gospel historian Tony Heilbut, “the greatest 
sex symbol in gospel history.”53 In 1956, Bumps Blackwell, Little 
 
Richard’s producer at Specialty, offered to “cut” Sam Cooke “pop.” His first session yielded “Lovable,” released under the name of Dale Cook 
in a fairly transparent attempt to avoid the wrath of the gospel com -
munity. Sam Cooke agonized over what musical direction to take, but in the end the decision was 
made for him, as his outraged gospel followers forced him to leave the Soul Stirrers in 1957.
Fearing reprisals from his gospel constituency, Art Rupe, owner of Specialty, released 
both Cooke and Blackwell from the label. The pair then joined Bob 
k
eene’s newly launched 
k
een label. Cooke’s first 
k
een release, “You Send Me” (1957), climbed straight to pop number 
one; seven more entered the Top Forty over the next three years. Cooke’s pop appeal seemed as effortless as the gospel-influenced melismas he used to embellish his vocals. In 1960, RCA, a label with almost no African American artists, was looking for an answer to the black-velvet 
tones of Columbia’s Johnny Mathis and signed Cooke. He scored nineteen more Top Forty hits, of which “Chain Gang” (1960), “Twistin’ the Night Away” (1962), “ Another Saturday Night” (1963), and “Shake” (1964) entered the Top Ten.
In 1959, Cooke took the rare step of forming his own publishing company, 
k
ags Music, 
with his mentor J. W . Alexander, tenor vocalist for the Pilgrim Travelers. 
k
ags’s audit of 
k
een’s 
royalty statements bankrupted the label and ended Cooke’s relationship with Bumps Blackwell. Cooke and Alexander used their 
k
ags earnings to finance a production company, an artists’ 
management company, and SAR (Sam and Alex Records)—arguably the first soul label—for which Cooke wrote and produced. SAR issued straight gospel recordings by the Soul Stirrers and more soul-oriented material by Johnny Taylor (later of disco fame); the Sims Twins; and the Valentinos, featuring Bobby Womack, all of whom were gospel artists who had embraced r&b.
Meanwhile, a number of formerly full-fledged gospel groups joined the 
k
ing subsid -
iary Federal, second only to Atlantic in the successful production of “rhythm and gospel.” The Gospel Starlighters became the Famous Flames, James Brown’s backup group. Echoes of the group’s gospel past could be heard on “Please, Please, Please” (1956), an eventual million seller. The Royal Sons emerged as the “5” Royales and recorded “Think” (1957) and “Dedicated to the One I Love” (1958). (The latter became a Top Ten pop hit for the Shirelles in 1961 and the Mamas and the Papas in 1967.) To avoid confusion with the “5” Royales, the Royals became the Midnighters; their “Work with Me Annie” (1954) launched the erotic Annie series that shocked the nation and rocked the gospel world to its foundations.
The Midnighters’ lead singer, Hank Ballard, heavily influenced by gospel as a boy, im-
bued the song with tremendous suggestiveness. Any doubt about the sexual connotation of the verb work was laid to rest in the two follow-up songs, “Sexy Ways” and “ Annie Had a Baby,” 
also released in 1954. All three were heavily censored, and all three were million sellers. The success of the trilogy spurred a number of decreasingly successful answer songs.
54 One answer 
song that was incredibly popular was Etta James’s “Wallflower” (1955), popularly known as 
“Roll with Me Henry” (a reference to Hank Ballard). When pop singer Georgia Gibbs tried to 
eliminate all traces of eroticism by redoing James’s song as “Dance with Me Henry,” the Mid-
nighters responded with “Henry’s Got Flat Feet (Can’t Dance No More)”—effectively ending the two-year affair.Sam Cooke agonized over what musi-
cal direction to take, but in the end 
the decision was made for him, as his 
outraged gospel followers forced him to 
leave the Soul Stirrers in 1957.104  ROC k IN ’ O u TDoo Wop: The Intersection of Gospel, Jazz, and Pop
To the average listener, gospel-oriented vocal groups were nearly indistinguishable from 
groups that employed a rock ‘n’ roll style known as doo wop. Doo wop was the product of urban vocal harmony groups—mostly black and almost invariably male—and owed as much 
to gospel, jazz, and pop as it did to the blues. Typical of the genre was a melodramatic, 
 
often 
gospel-inflected lead tenor bracketed by a distinctive bass and a 
soaring falsetto. Background vocals usually consisted of nonsense syllables such as “Sha-na-na-na sha-na-na-na-na” and “Oodly-  
pop-a-cow pop-a-cow pop-a-cow cow.” Doo and wop were syllables used to name the music, but not until well after the style had been established. In terms of output, doo wop was the largest single sub-
genre of rock ‘n’ roll to come into existence; according to Greil Marcus, “it was the first form of rock & roll to take shape, to define itself as something people recognized as new, different, 
strange, theirs.”
55 While there were a few dozen groups who dominated the genre, some with 
one or two hits, hundreds more were destined only for obscurity. Among these were countless 
“bird groups”: the Ravens, the Orioles, the Larks, the Robins, the Swallows, the Flamingos, the 
Crows, the Cardinals, the Falcons, the Penguins, the Pelicans, the Jayhawks, and (
 
stretching 
the concept) the Feathers. And there were slightly fewer “car groups”: the Cadillacs, the 
El 
 
Dorados, the Fleetwoods, the Continentals, the Impalas, the Imperials, even the Edsels.
In addition to its gospel roots, doo wop could be traced back to two black pop/jazz 
vocal harmony groups that had achieved mainstream success in the 1930s and 1940s—the Mills Brothers and, to an even greater degree, the Ink Spots, who turned out nearly fifty hits for Decca between 1939 and 1951. Both groups used close barbershop harmonies and light rhythms. The Ink Spots’ “If I Didn’t Care” and “My Prayer” (1939), featuring lead singer Bill 
k
enny’s high tenor and “Hoppy” Jones’ talking bass, are, by almost any measure, 
proto doo wop.
In the late 1940s, a number of young black groups—among them, the Ravens, the Four 
Tunes, the Four 
k
nights, and the Orioles—tried to emulate, with some innovations and vary -
ing degrees of success, the style of these groups. The Ravens pioneered the use of the bass lead 
on “Old Man River” (1946), which sold 2 million copies. Over the next several years, the group turned out a string of r&b hits, including “I Don’t Have to Ride No More” (1950) and “Rock Me All Night Long” (1952), both of which achieved Top Ten r&b status.
When the Orioles—originally called the Vibranaires—came to the attention of 
 
Deborah 
Chessler, an astute manager-songwriter in Baltimore, Maryland, Greil Marcus has said, “They 
made their piece of history—a young Jewish woman and five black men in an utterly segregated American city. . . . Together they found 
the new sound.”
56 After a booking on Arthur Godfrey’s talent show 
in 1948, Jubilee Records signed the group and renamed them the 
Orioles. Their first recording, Chessler’s “It’s Too Soon to 
k
now,” 
went Top Ten r&b in 1948 and has been named by Marcus as a con-
tender for “first rock ‘n’ roll record.” The Orioles followed with a 
string of r&b classics, including “Forgive and Forget” (1950), “Baby Doo wop was the product of urban vo-
cal harmony groups—mostly black and 
almost invariably male—and owed as 
much to gospel, jazz, and pop as it did to 
the blues.
Doo wop hit makers were spread 
across every region of the country. A 
remarkable number were “one hit won-
ders”—groups that disappeared after 
only one (or two) pop hits. This pattern was more a reflection of how the re-cord companies treated these artists 
than of the groups’ talent. C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 105Please Don’t Go” (1952), and their biggest hit, “Crying in the Chapel” (1953). Jubilee also 
had the Cadillacs, who crossed over to the pop charts with the up-tempo “Speedo” in 1956. Other groups that tried to duplicate the Orioles’ “cool” sound included the Larks (“My Rev-
erie,” 1951) and the Five 
k
eys (“Glory of Love,” 1951; “Ling Ting Tong,” 1954; and “Out of 
Sight, Out of Mind,” 1956).
Doo wop hit makers were spread across every region of the country. A remarkable num-
ber were “one hit wonders”—groups that disappeared after only one (or two) pop hits. This 
pattern was more a reflection of how the record companies treated these artists than of the groups’ talent. Even more successful groups like the Harptones (“Sunday 
k
ind of Love” [1953, 
Bruce], “Life Is but a Dream” [1954, Paradise], and “What Will I Tell My Heart?” [1961, Companion]) bounced from label to label before fading from the scene.
The most interesting thing about these groups is that, in many instances, their individual 
and unrelated recordings gave doo wop its overall character. As a result, the history of doo 
wop often reads like a record catalogue. But what a remarkable catalogue it is. The sounds that helped define this era include Carl Feaster’s jazz scatting on the Chords’ “Sh’Boom,” 
 
Cleveland 
Duncan’s plaintive cry on “Earth Angel,” the elegant balladry of Fred Parris on “Still of the Night,” the playful macho posturing of Mr. Earl (Carroll) on “Speedo,” Little Joe Cook’s screeching falsetto on “Peanuts,” Fred Johnson’s staccato bass on “Blue Moon,” and the subtle Latin blush of the Elegants’ “Little Star” and the Mystics’ “Hushabye.”
If the doo wop style had a center, however, it was New York City, where a greater num-
ber of groups and labels were found than any other region. Herald/Ember, founded by Al Silver in 1952, generally recorded out-of-state talent: the Nutmegs and the Five Satins from 
Connecticut and the Tur-
bans and the Silhouettes from 
Pennsylvania. In 1952, Rama’s founder, George Goldner, be -
gan recruiting directly from New York’s streets. After scor-ing his first success in this area with “Gee” by the Crows—a record that unusually first HEAR MORE
Audio Links for a list 
of One Hit Wonders on MySearchLab
The Chords were among the many “one-
hit wonders” who defined doo wop. Their “Sh’Boom” combines the jazz, pop, and r&b 
influences of the style and remains one of 
the most memorable songs of the rock ‘n’ roll era.106  ROC k IN ’ O u Tappeared on the pop charts and then became an r&b hit—Goldner launched a subsidiary also 
called Gee, that had hits with the Mello-Tones, the Cleftones, and Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers (“Why Do Fools Fall in Love” and “I Want You to Be My Girl” in 1956; “Goody 
Goody” in 1957).
57 In 1957, Goldner formed two other labels, Gone and End, with deejay Alan 
Freed listed as producer. Freed changed the Chesters’ name to Little Anthony and the Imperi-
als; their “Tears on My Pillow” was a Top Ten pop hit in 1959 on End.
The New York label that had the most luck with vocal harmony groups was Atlantic. Its 
first successful group was the Clovers from Washington, D.C. From 1951 to 1954, the group 
had thirteen consecutive Top Ten r&b hits, including “Don’t You 
k
now I Love You,” “Fool, 
Fool, Fool,” “One Mint Julep,” “Ting-a-Ling,” and the original rock ‘n’ roll versions of “Blue Velvet” and “Devil or Angel.” They crossed over to pop with “Love, Love, Love” (1956). Their last hit was their best—“Love Potion No. 9” (1959), a rock ‘n’ roll classic, written and produced by Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller for 
u
nited Artists after the group had left Atlantic.
Two other Atlantic vocal groups achieved greatness working with Leiber and Stoller—
the Coasters and the Drifters. The Coasters had begun in Los Angeles as the Robins, whose 
“Double Crossing Blues” (1950) was a number one r&b hit. Atlantic was sufficiently impressed with songs such as “Smokey Joe’s Cafe” and “Riot in Cell Block No. 9” that it bought the 
 
Robins’ catalogue and hired Leiber and Stoller as independent producers to work with them. The Coasters’ first six releases—“Searchin’” and “Young Blood” (1957), “Yakety Yak” (1958), and “Charlie Brown,” “ Along Came Jones,” and “Poison Ivy” (1959), all written and produced by Leiber and Stoller and punctuated instrumentally by the “yakety sax” of 
k
ing Curtis—made 
the pop Top Ten. The Coasters remained major hit-makers until 1961.
After the original Drifters broke up, their manager, George Treadwell, persuaded the Five 
Crowns (with Ben E. 
k
ing on lead) to take their name. Produced by Leiber and Stoller, who 
merged r&b and gospel with a decided Latin tinge, the new Drifters had immediate success with 
hits such as “There Goes My Baby” and “Dance with Me” in 1959 and “This Magic Moment” 
and “Save the Last Dance for Me” in 1960. When 
k
ing left the group in 1960, gospel-trained 
Rudy Lewis replaced him, singing lead on “
u
p on the Roof ” (1962) and “On Broadway” (1963). 
Sadly, Lewis died just before the group recorded their classic “
u
nder the Boardwalk” (1964).
The productions of Leiber and Stoller were so elaborate—often involving dozens of 
takes, complex arrangements, and significant editing to achieve the desired effect—that they 
must be seen as the moment of transition from the innocence and 
spontaneity (and amateurishness) of classic doo wop to the cal-culated products of the producer as an artist in his own right. As Leiber once observed, “The thing to remember is you’re not writ-ing a song but a record.”
58 This outlook separates the recordings of 
the early doo wop groups from the vocal harmony groups (chiefly, 
the “girl groups”) of the 1960s.
Of course, New York City was not the only place that produced doo wop. Both the 
 
Spaniels (“Baby It’s You,” 1953) and the Flamingos (“Golden Teardrops,” 1953) started with 
Chance Records in Chicago. The Spaniels moved to Vee Jay, where they recorded their biggest hit, “Goodnight, It’s Time to Go,” in 1954. The Flamingos broke through to the pop market on the End label with “Lovers Never Say Goodbye” (1957). Their biggest hits were “I Only The productions of Leiber and Stoller 
were so elaborate that they must be 
seen as the moment of transition from 
the innocence and spontaneity (and 
amateurishness) of classic doo wop to the calculated products of the producer as an artist in his own right. C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 107
Listening Guide 8Sh’Boom”
Artist:
 
The Chords
Music/Lyrics by James Keyes,  
Carl Feaster, Claude Feaster,  Floyd McRae, and  Ricky Edwards
Label:
 
Cat (1954)“Sh’Boom” was an early doo wop hit by a South Bronx group called the 
Chords: Jimmy Keyes, Carl Feaster, Claude Feaster, Floyd “Buddy” McRae, 
and Ricky Edwards, who supposedly wrote the song together while sitting 
in a Cadillac convertible.
Many record company executives in the 1950s believed that the 
song was what sold and not the singer(s) or the particular performance. 
This belief fueled the unfortunate practice of re-recording an African 
 
American group’s r&b hit with a new version by a white vocal group that would have been, presumably, more attractive to white teenage listeners, the major market for this music.
The Chords’ “Sh’Boom” is a famous and oft-cited example of this phenomenon. It had originally been the B-side 
of a single, the A-side of which was a cover of Patti Page’s “Cross over the Bridge.” Disc jockeys preferred “Sh’Boom,” which became a huge hit, going to number 5 on the pop charts. Patti Page’s label, Mercury, then released a watered-down but highly successful version of “Sh’Boom” by a white group called the Crew Cuts. Atlantic subsidiary Cat rereleased the 
Chords’ “Sh’Boom” with a different flip side, but the Chords still lost out. “Sh’Boom” was their only big hit. It has become a beloved classic, however, of the early doo wop era.
Musical Style Notes
Like many doo wop songs, the structure of “Sh’Boom” is loosely based on the tried-and-true template of verse- 
verse-bridge-verse: two initial verses, both sung to the same melody, which are followed by a bridge section with a new melody, which then leads back into another verse with the original melody. This aaba form, as it’s sometimes called, is 
one of the most common popular song forms, from Tin Pan Alley to doo wop, to Beatles songs. However, the Chords vary 
it somewhat, adding short verses in which singer Carl Feaster scats (a term taken from jazz), or sings on nonsense syl-lables leading into a repetition of the “Life could be a dream” lyric. There is also an instrumental break over the chords of the verse, with a sax solo by Sam Taylor in the great, gritty r&b style sometimes called dirty sax.108  ROC k IN ’ O u T
Listening Guide 8Musical “Road Map”
TIMINGS COMMENTS
0:00–0:04 A capella voices begin in harmony.
0:04–0:08 Instruments enter.
0:08–0:23 Verse 1
Background vocals add nonsense syllables, “Sh’boom.”
0:23–0:29 Singer Carl Feaster “scats” (sings on nonsense syllables).
0:29–0:44 Verse 2
0:44–0:58 Bridge section; different melody, sung by bass Ricky Edwards; guitar plays fills; background vocals 
on “ahh.”
0:58–1:12 Verse 3
All voices sing lyrics in harmony.
1:12–1:22
1:18Singer Carl Feaster “scats” (sings on nonsense syllables); background harmonies.All sing.
1:22–1:53 Sam Taylor plays sax solo over the chords of the verse, twice through.
1:53–2:08 Verse 3 repeats, beginning with unison “wooooo. . . .”All voices sing lyrics in harmony.
2:08–2:26 Singer Carl Feaster “scats” (sings on nonsense syllables); background harmonies.Vocals reenter. C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 109Have Eyes for You” (1959) and “Nobody Loves Me Like You” (1960). Chicago’s Chess label had 
the Moonglows, founded in Cleveland by Harvey Fuqua (later a Motown writer/producer) in 1951. The group scored three Top Thirty hits—“Sincerely” (1955), “See Saw” (1956), and “Ten 
Commandments of Love” (1958)—in the classic doo wop mold.
In Cincinnati, 
k
ing Records had the Charms (“Gum Drop” and “Hearts of Stone,” 1954; 
“Ivory Tower,” 1956) on its De Luxe label, bought in 1953. 
k
ing lost the group that went on to 
become the most successful of all the vocal harmony groups—the Platters. Originally signed 
to 
k
ing’s Federal label, they were often used as backup. When Buck Ram, their coach/man-
ager, insisted on $100 a session for background vocals, Federal released them. Ram got them signed to Mercury, a major label, in 1955, where they scored twenty Top Forty pop hits over the next seven years.
More than any other group, the Platters carried the torch lit by the Ink Spots two 
 
decades earlier. Their first two releases for Mercury were Ram tunes: “Only You” went to 
 
number five in 1955 and “The Great Pretender” hit number one in 1956. “My Prayer” (1956), 
with Tony Williams on lead vocal, was a number one pop hit and a virtual remake of the Ink Spots’ 1939 original. “Twilight Time,” a number one hit in 1958, had been co-written by Ram in 1938 for the Three Suns. The group’s last Top Ten hit, “Harbor Lights” (1960), had been popularized by Rudy Vallee in 1937. Although the Platters, in fact, sounded more pop than doo wop, their music was accepted as rock ‘n’ roll.
Pioneering black doo wop groups were followed by white or integrated groups. Among 
the white groups, Italian Americans predominated.
59 The most popular Italian American doo 
wop group, from Belmont Avenue in the Bronx, called themselves Dion (DiMucci) and the Bel-
monts. Performed in classic doo wop style, “I Wonder Why,” the group’s first of many releases 
on Laurie, became a Top Twenty pop hit in 1958. “ A Teenager in Love” and “Where or When,” 
the Rodgers and Hart classic, made the Top Ten in 1959 and 1960, respectively. In 1960, Dion left the group to go solo. By 1963, he had acquired thirteen Top Forty pop hits, a new wife (the inspiration for “Runaround Sue,” recorded with the uncredited Del-Satins), and a drug problem that forced him out of the business for the next five years.
The Dell-Vikings, who met in the service, were the first racially integrated doo wop 
group (originally, three black and two white singers) to hit the pop charts. “Come Go with Me” 
and “Whispering Bells” both entered the Top Ten in 1957. 
Johnny Maestro and the 
Dion and the Belmonts were one of the 
first white groups to pick up the torch of doo wop and carry it beyond the 1950s. 
Italian Americans all, they were true to 
the style and a testament to the hybrid-ity of the music.
110  ROC k IN ’ O u TCrests included an Italian American lead (John Mastrangelo) and a background vocal group of 
color. They recorded five Top Thirty hits, the best being the first—“Sixteen Candles” (1958). 
 Maestro resurfaced in the 1960s as the lead singer for the Brooklyn Bridge (“The Worst Thing 
That Could Happen,” 1967).
Second in rarity to racial integration was gender balance. While some doo wop groups 
added women essentially for show,
60 a few boasted strong female leads. There were also some 
all-female groups, whose songs defined male–female relationships in ways that prefigured the 
arrival of the early 1960s “girl groups.” (See the chart below.) The producer most associated 
with the girl group phenomenon, Phil Spector, got his first big break as part of a vocal trio 
with a female lead. The Teddy Bears’ “To 
k
now Him Is to Love Him,” a song Spector fashioned 
from the inscription on his father’s tombstone, featured Annette 
k
leinbard’s lead and went to 
number one in 1958. Spector duplicated the soothing vocal sound with the Paris Sisters (“I Love How You Love Me”) in 1961 before his production style became completely devoted to his legendary “wall of sound.” Taking that soothing vocal sound still further, the Fleetwoods, a trio of one man and two women, used soft, elegant harmonies built around an almost seamless male–female blend that moved vocal harmony groups further away from doo wop style.
Doo wop was a 1950s phenomenon that spilled over somewhat into the next decade.
61 
The Four Seasons’ musical roots, for example, could be traced to doo wop. Their “Sherry” 
(1962, Vee Jay), a number one pop hit, received significant play on black radio before a live ap-
pearance on American Bandstand revealed a white Italian American vocal harmony group. The 
group, featuring the three-octave range of lead singer Frankie Valli (born Francis Castelluccio), had twenty-nine chart singles over the next fifteen years, in addition to Valli’s nine solo hits.
GrOup S /S ONGS  w IT h F EM al E  lE ad S S ONGS , lE ad S INGE r Y E ar
Six Teens “A Casual Look” (Trudy Williams) 1956
The Tune Weavers “Happy, Happy Birthday, Baby” (Margo Sylvia) 1957
The Aquatones “You” (Barbara Lee) 1958
The Teddy Bears “To Know Him Is to Love Him” (Annette Kleinbard) 1958
The Innocents “A Thousand Stars” (Kathy Young) 1960
The Fleetwoods “Come Softly to Me” 1959
“Mr. Blue” 1959
“Tragedy” 1961
all-FEM al E  Gr O up S S ONG  T IT l E Y E ar
The Teen Queens “Eddie, My Love” 1956
The Bobbettes “Mr. Lee” 1957
The Shepherd Sisters “Alone” 1957
The Poni-Tails “Born Too Late” 1958
The Quintones “Down the Aisle of Love” 1958
The Chantels “Maybe” 1958
The Paris Sisters “I Love How You Love Me” 1961 C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 111Still, as a phenomenon, doo wop was over in 1961. As if to signal the end of the era, 
Little Caesar and the Romans released “Those Oldies but Goodies” that same year. The song 
went to number nine on the pop charts, and the designation “oldies but goodies” was imme-
diately applied to songs released in the previous decade, including some that had been hits a 
year earlier.
Latin Music Rocks
Although u .S. popular music can be described as profoundly hybrid, drawing on multiple 
sources, its history is most often recounted in terms of black and white—black culture versus 
the mainstream. Individuals and groups that do not fit neatly into this black–white binary 
have tended to be rendered invisible or simply assigned to one or the other group. Frankie 
Lymon and the Teenagers, for example, were identified as a black group, even though two of its members, Joe Negroni and Herman Santiago, were Puerto Rican. The Harptones and the Vocaleers were similarly “integrated.” Latino Harold Torres rounded out the background vo-cals of Johnny Maestro and the Crests, even though the Crests were identified as black. In the 1950s, if Latinos looked black, they were assumed to be African American, whether or not their own primary identification was racial. Conversely, when Ritchie Valens was riding the popu-larity of his pop-sounding number two hit “Donna,” prior to the ascendancy of its B-side “La Bamba,” most of his white fans simply assumed he was white.
Further confusions arose from the fact that perceptions of Latin 
Americans were sometimes conflated with those of Mediterranean 
immigrants whose languages had Latin roots. The “Latin lover” ste-reotype, for example, applied equally well to people of Italian or Latin American descent (as did the more negative term greaser). Given such cultural confusion, it was not surprising to see mid-1950s Tin Pan Alley hits such as Rose-mary Clooney’s “Mambo Italiano” or Perry Como’s “Papa Loves Mambo.” This situation has to be unraveled to engage in a reasonable discussion of Latin(o) music and musicians as a ma-jor influence on 
u
.S. popular music.
In the 1950s, the 
u
.S. Latino population comprised mainly Chicanos in the Southwest and 
a large influx of Puerto Ricans (and a smattering of Cubans) along the eastern seaboard. At 
this time, Cuban musics such as rumba, mambo, and cha cha cha invariably generated national 
dance crazes in the 
u
nited States that took hold at clubs like the Palladium, a pivotal midtown 
Manhattan nightspot where Latin music devotees gathered.62 For this music, there were hot 
Latin bands like those of Machito, Tito Rodriguez, and Tito Puente, which entertained a hard-
core Latino audience, and others like Perez Prado and Xavier Cugat, which catered to a more 
upscale Anglo clientele. When Tin Pan Alley incorporated these influences into popular song, 
it was generally for their novelty value. The 1924 Tin Pan Alley classic “Tea for Two” thus became “Tea for Two Cha Cha” in 1958 and a Top Ten hit for the Tommy Dorsey Orchestra. But we have already seen how Tin Pan Alley embraced Latin influences; the point here is that  
rock ‘n’ roll was no exception.HEAR MORE
Audio Links on 
MySearchLab
In the 1950s, if Latinos looked black, 
they were assumed to be African  
American, whether or not their own  
primary identification was racial.
112  ROC k IN ’ O u TCountless rock ‘n’ roll songs, crossing lines of race, ethnicity, and style, appropriated 
Latin rhythms, some with more success and credibility than others. The A-side of the Penguins 
surprise 1954 hit “Earth Angel” was the Latin-inspired “Hey Senorita.” Ruth Brown’s “Mambo 
Baby” hit number one on the r&b charts in 1954. Even as Bill Haley was “rocking around the 
clock” in 1955, he cracked the Top Twenty with “Mambo Rock.” Los Angeles r&b artist Rich-ard Berry based the now-classic riff of his 1957 song, “Louie Louie,” on “El Loco Cha Cha” by the Cuban pianist Rene Touzet; the riff was kept intact in the more famous 1963 version by the 
k
ingsmen.63 Doo wop abounded with Latin-inflected releases, such as the Turbans’ “When You 
Dance,” the Gladiolas’ “Little Darlin’,” the Elegants’ “Little Star,” and the Mystics’ “Hushabye.” 
There were the compelling bongo riffs on Bobbie Freeman’s “Do You Wanna Dance.” Exam-
ples from the teen idols include Paul Anka’s “Diana” and Bobby Darin’s “Dream Lover.” From 
rhythm and gospel, Jackie Wilson had a number of Latin-tinged hits such as “Reet Petite” and “Lonely Teardrops.” The apex of Ray Charles’s rhythm and gospel fusion was his 1959 hit “What’d I Say,” played to a rumba beat.
At times, Latin influences found their way into rock ‘n’ roll through producers who strad-
dled both worlds. George Goldner, who started the Rama, Gee, Gone, and End labels in New York, began his music career as the owner and head producer of Tico Records, New York’s most important independent Latin label (and home to Tito Rodriguez and Tito Puente). Before the Crows had a bona fide rock ‘n’ roll hit with “Gee” in 1954, Goldner had released a mambo 
version of the song on Tico. He even convinced the Crows to record the novelty “Mambo 
 
Shevitz” after their initial success.
Nowhere was the incorporation of Spanish Caribbean influences more integrated or better 
executed than in the work of writer/producers Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller with the African American vocal harmony group the Drifters. The story of Leiber and Stoller is usually discussed in terms of two young white Jewish writers/producers sufficiently immersed in African 
 
American 
culture to achieve credibility. There is certainly merit to this story, but there’s more. After moving to Los Angeles with his family in 1949, Stoller became heavily involved with young, working-class Mexican American hipsters known as pachucos, who were into cutting-edge r&b and current Spanish Caribbean styles. Stoller even claimed to have “learned the pachuco dances and joined a pachuco social club.”
64 He got his musical start playing piano with the Blas Vasquez band, which 
of course influenced his songwriting. After being paired with the Drifters in New York, Leiber 
and Stoller combined lavish strings and orchestral arrangements with sensuous Latin rhythms 
to produce countless hits such as “Dance with Me,” “This Magic Moment,” “Save the Last Dance 
for Me,” and “
u
p on the Roof.” Leiber then added content to Latin musical influences when he 
teamed up with Phil Spector in 1960 to write “Spanish Harlem”—which provided vocalist Ben E. 
k
ing with his first solo hit after leaving the Drifters.
By the late 1950s, Los Angeles rock ‘n’ rollers began to move toward styles that drew on 
Mexican sounds. The Champs’ “Tequila” went to number one on the pop charts for five weeks in 1958. It was followed with “El Rancho Rock,” a rocked-up version of the 1934 Mexican bal-lad “ Alla en El Rancho Grande,” which had been a hit for Bing Crosby. It is often noted that the Champs included, at various times, Jim Seals and Dash Crofts (later Seals and Crofts) and Glen 
Campbell on guitar. Less often mentioned is the fact that “Tequila” was written by the Champs’ Chicano sax player Danny Flores, who performed as Chuck Rio.
65 C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 113One artist who might have developed this sound further was Ritchie Valens (Richard 
Valenzuela), the first Chicano rock ‘n’ roll star. While his biggest hit, “Donna,” sounded like it 
could have been one more classic rock ‘n’ roll ballad by another white rocker, Valens revealed a 
different persona on the record’s B-side and challenged the conventional wisdom of the music 
industry, not simply by recording a rock ‘n’ roll version of a traditional Mexican song—the Champs had already done that—but by recording it in Spanish. “La Bamba” may have only reached number twenty-two, but its influence on popular music has been incalculable. All of the other hits were sung in English (“C’mon, Let’s Go,” “That’s My Little Susie,” “Little Girl”), but there is evidence to suggest that he had broader plans, including a rock ‘n’ roll version of Ernesto Lecuona’s “Malaguena.” 
u
nfor-
tunately, Valens was killed in the February 3, 
1959, plane crash that took the lives of Buddy Holly and the Big Bopper, which has been eu-logized as “the day the music died.” But his legacy lived on in the Chicano rock groups of the 1960s (covered in Chapter 6) and in the rock/Mexican fusions of Los Lobos in the 1970s and beyond.
Rockabilly: The Country Strain
As rock ‘n’ roll developed, it was only a matter of time until some 
entrepreneur figured out that white artists who could merge r&b and c&w with credibility would have enormous sales potential. The 
person usually credited with this discovery is Sam Phillips, who 
founded Sun Records in Memphis, Tennessee, in 1953. According to Marion 
k
eisker, Phillips’s partner at Sun, Phillips once said, “If I could find a white man who 
had the Negro sound and the Negro feel, I could make a billion dollars.”66 More than a sim-
ple statement of financial calculation, Phillips’ remark—made with an undertone of irony—
 
indicated that rock ‘n’ roll was not immune from the larger racial inequalities that continued 
to inform American society at large. So it was that Elvis Presley, the supposed fulfillment of 
Phillips’ wish, would be crowned the 
k
ing of Rock ‘n’ Roll.
In fact, Bill Haley and His Comets, not Presley, were the first major white rock ‘n’ roll 
act to reach the mainstream market with a fusion of r&b and c&w. The music that Presley and the Sun artists who followed him played was called “rockabilly,” after its amalgam of rocking 
 
African American and so-called hillbilly styles. According to Charlie Gillett, rocka-
billy differs from Haley’s fusion because it has “much looser rhythms, no saxophones, nor any chorus singing.”
67 Haley’s music, in contrast, sounds more arranged, more calculated. 
Haley related to his country roots through the instrumentation of a western swing combo; 
Presley’s early Sun sides did not even include drums, like the bluegrass by which it was 
partly inspired.
Ritchie Valens drew on his Chicano heritage 
to add another cultural source to the musi-cal brew that was rock ‘n’ roll. Who knows 
how much further he might have taken that 
sound had he not been killed in a plane crash three months before his eighteenth birthday?
As rock ‘n’ roll developed, it was only a 
matter of time until some entrepreneur 
figured out that white artists who could 
merge r&b and c&w with credibility 
would have enormous sales potential.
114  ROC k IN ’ O u TThe differences between Haley’s public persona and that of the rockabilly artists are even 
more significant. In the mythology of rockabilly, there has always been something appealing 
about youthful white southern performers who recorded with pronounced regional accents for 
independent labels. Presley was the archetype even after he no longer fit the image. Bill Haley’s 
celebrity was quite different. Balding and looking somewhat middle-aged by the time his career took off, he was a most unlikely candidate to become a rock ‘n’ roll sensation. A Michigan na-tive with no distinguishable accent, Haley’s celebrity seems all the more improbable because he was signed by a major label, Decca, and his best-selling record, “Rock Around the Clock,” was written by two Tin Pan Alley veterans (Max Freedman and Jimmy De
k
night).
Haley once described his early sound as “a combination of country and western, Dixie-
land, and the old style rhythm and blues.”68 His heroes were Bob Wills and His Texas Play-
boys, who played western swing, and his band approximated the pivotal sound of Louis Jordan. 
Haley’s producer, Milt Gabler (Jordan’s producer in the 1940s), told Arnold Shaw that he had 
consciously modeled Haley’s sound after Jordan’s jump beat. “We’d begin with Jordan’s shuffle 
rhythm,” said Gabler. “You know, dotted eighth notes and sixteenths, and we’d build on it. I’d Bill Haley and His Comets drew their inspiration from sources as disparate as Bob Wills and the 
Texas Playboys and Louis Jordan and the Tympani Five in constructing their country/r&b fusion. Adding outrageous stage antics to the mix, they earned a memorable niche in rock ‘n’ roll history.
 C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 115sing Jordan riffs to the group that would be picked up by the electric guitars and tenor sax. . . .  
They got a sound that had the drive of The Tympani Five and the color of country and 
 western.”
69 After Haley signed with Decca in 1953, with Gabler as his producer, he enjoyed 
his biggest hits, including “Dim, Dim the Lights” (1954) and “See You Later, Alligator” (1956). 
With its lyrics cleaned up, his 1954 version of Big Joe Turner’s “Shake, Rattle, and Roll” 
 
became 
a classic rock ‘n’ roll recording and his first million seller.
When “Rock Around the Clock” was first released in 1954, it fizzled. Because of its Tin 
Pan Alley parentage, however, it was selected as the theme for the Hollywood film Blackboard 
Jungle.70 Within weeks of the film’s 1955 release, the song went to number one on the pop charts 
and stayed there for eight weeks, eventually becoming one of the biggest-selling rock ‘n’ roll 
records in history, with sales of nearly 17 million copies. By the time Elvis Presley hit the pop 
charts, over a year after “Rock Around the Clock” was released, Haley was in his thirties and 
over the hill by teenage standards. His star was soon supplanted by younger rockabilly artists from Memphis—Carl Perkins, Johnny Cash, Jerry Lee Lewis, and, of course, Presley himself.
Sam Phillips had a definite strategy when he launched the careers of these younger art -
ists. While Syd Nathan at 
k
ing Records encouraged his c&w artists to record country versions 
of r&b hits, and vice versa, he was simply trying to maximize his publishing income, not break down racial barriers. Similarly motivated, Phillips tried a different tack; he deliberately sought to filter the black experience through white performers to make it more 
 
accessible to the mainstream audience. As Peter Guralnick has noted, “With 
Elvis, Phillips apparently found the key because following Elvis’ success he had a succession of rockabillies who did just that. All of his major artists were poor whites who had not only lived in constant contact with black people all their lives but had obviously absorbed a great deal of their culture.”
71 Phillips’s strat-
egy earned Sun Records a place of mythic proportions in the history of rock ‘n’ roll, but it also 
begged questions about rip-offs and racism.
Phillips started the Memphis Recording Service in 1950. For $2 a side, anyone could 
walk in and make a record. His was the only convenient studio for the Delta bluesmen who 
played the nearby Beale Street clubs. In the days when out-of-town producers were scour -
ing the South for new talent, Phillips was already recording Howlin’ Wolf, B. B. 
k
ing, Bobby 
Bland, James Cotton, Little Walter, Little Junior Parker, Elmore James, Walter Horton, and Rufus Thomas, among others. At first, he leased all his masters to Modern and Chess, but after producing notable r&b hits such as Jackie Brenston’s “Rocket 88” and Little Walter’s “Juke,” for Chess and Checker, respectively, Phillips decided in 1952 to launch his own label—Sun Records. The following year, a young truck driver stopped in to cut two songs for his mother’s 
birthday. Four dollars and a little more than a year later, Elvis Presley had changed the face of popular music forever.
Presley also altered the operations of Sun Records profoundly. As Rufus Thomas once 
said, “When Elvis and Carl Perkins and Johnny Cash come along, just like he catered to black, Phillips cut it off and went to white. No more blacks did he pick up at all.”
72 Most of the white 
artists who gravitated toward Sun had grown up in close proximity to African Americans and 
their culture. Jerry Lee Lewis explained how he “used to hang around Haney’s Big House, that Phillips deliberately sought to filter the 
black experience through white perform-
ers to make it more accessible to the 
mainstream audience.
116  ROC k IN ’ O u Twas a colored establishment where they had dances and such. . . . I saw a lot of ’em there, all 
those blues players.”73 Carl Perkins noted that he was
raised on a plantation in the flatlands of Lake Country, Tennessee, and we were about the only 
white people on it. . . . Working in the cotton fields in the sun, music was the only escape. The co-
loured people would sing, and I’d join in, just a little kid, and that was coloured rhythm and blues, got named rock ‘n’ roll, got named that in 1956, but the same music was there years before, and it was my music.
74
Elvis Aron Presley was born in Tupelo, Mississippi, the only child (a twin brother was 
born dead) of Vernon and Gladys Presley, on January 8, 1935. When he was ten years old, he 
placed fifth in a talent contest, singing “Old Shep,” a sentimental country tune. He learned to 
play the guitar a year later. As a teenager in Memphis, where his family had moved, Presley 
attended Pentecostal church services, and would bring his guitar to the camp meetings and re-vivals attended by his family. In a more secular vein, he discovered Delta bluesmen like Big Bill Broonzy and Arthur “Big Boy” Crudup, for listening to whom he would be scolded by his par-ents. Presley recalled of the latter: “‘Sinful music,’ the townfolk in Memphis said it was. Which never bothered me, I guess.”
75
It took Phillips more than a year to record Presley commercially. According to one 
story, Phillips intended to work on sentimental ballads like the ones Presley had cut for his 
mother. When nothing gelled, Presley and session musicians Scotty Moore (guitar) and Bill 
Black (bass) started fooling around with Big Boy Crudup’s “That’s All Right.” Phillips, sur-
prised that Presley even knew the song, encouraged them to start again so he could record it. When he played it back, Moore remembered, “We thought it was exciting, but what was it? It was just so completely different. But it really just flipped Sam—he felt it really had some-
thing.”
76 Sure enough, that song, backed 
with Bill Monroe’s classic bluegrass tune 
“Blue Moon of 
k
entucky,” set in motion 
a chain reaction that ultimately changed 
the pop landscape. A dub of the recording was sent to Dewey Phillips (no relation), a Memphis deejay, who liked it so much that HEAR MORE
Elvis Presley on 
MySearchLab
By any measure, Elvis Presley—the rock ‘n’ 
roller who was crowned king—was a mon-ster talent, albeit one who sometimes ap-
plied his considerable gifts to material that 
was of questionable value. He is pictured in a scene from Jailhouse Rock, one of his bet-ter movies. C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 117he played it thirty times in one night. By the time Sun pressed the record, it had orders for 
5,000 copies.
From the beginning, Presley presented a marketing dilemma. No one knew exactly what 
to make of this “hillbilly cat,” as he was described by one early billing that managed to capture 
the tension of his down-home yet wildly cool persona. “I recall one jockey telling me that Elvis was so country he shouldn’t be played after 5 a.m.,” said Sam Phillips. “ And others said he was too black for them.”
77 When Dewey Phillips interviewed Presley on the air, he made it a point 
to establish that Elvis had attended the all-white Humes High School “because a lot of people 
listening had thought he was colored.”78 Though Presley’s first release combined r&b and c&w 
(as did all his subsequent Sun releases), he was marketed as country. Still, even when he sang country songs, he transformed them. As Greil Marcus wrote, “Elvis could not have sung ‘Blue 
Moon of 
k
entucky’ as he did without the discoveries of ‘That’s All Right’—but what he dis-
covered was not his ability to imitate a black blues singer, but the nerve to cross the borders he 
had been raised to respect.”79
The professional reaction to Presley’s unorthodox style was mixed. After his debut at the 
Grand Ole Opry, he was told to go back to truck driving. He had better luck at the 
 
Louisiana 
Hayride, where he became a regular. Invariably, his live performances were electrifying, as 
country singer Bob Luman recalled:
This cat came out in red pants and a green coat and a pink shirt and socks, and had this sneer 
on his face and he stood behind the mike for five minutes, I’ll bet, before he made a move. Then he hit his guitar a lick, and he broke two strings. I’d been playing ten years, and I hadn’t broken a 
total of two strings. So there he was, these two strings dangling, and he hadn’t done anything yet, and these high school girls were screaming and fainting and running up to the stage, and then he started to move his hips real slow like he had a thing for his guitar. That was Elvis Presley when he was about 19, playing Kilgore, Texas.
80
Presley recorded a total of ten sides for Sun. In their innocence and 
seeming spontaneity, these recordings helped shape the Presley leg-end, and in their unique blend of cultural influences, they contrib-
uted to the definition of the rockabilly style. Although each record 
sold better than the one before it, Presley never reached a mass pop-ular music audience through them. It was not until the heavy-handed Colonel Tom Parker replaced deejay Bob Neal as Presley’s manager in 1955 that his career was transformed into the stuff of myth.
Parker engineered the sale of Presley’s contract to RCA-Victor for the then unheard-of 
sum of $35,000 plus $5,000 in back royalties, which Presley used to purchase his fabled pink Cadillac. His first RCA release, “Heartbreak Hotel” (1956), with Chet Atkins on guitar and Floyd Cramer on piano, was number one on the pop charts for eight weeks. That same year, 
“Hound Dog”/“Don’t Be Cruel,” a double-sided hit, reached number one on the pop charts, the r&b charts, and the c&w charts simultaneously, perhaps the first record ever to do so. From then on, Presley had multiple Top Forty pop hits every year until the day he died. Parker’s practice of allowing his star to record only songs with publishing rights assigned to Presley Music (BMI) or Gladys Music (ASCAP) restricted Presley’s choice of material in later years It was not until the heavy-handed 
 
Colonel Tom Parker replaced deejay Bob 
Neal as Presley’s manager in 1955 that 
his career was transformed into the stuff 
of myth.
118  ROC k IN ’ O u Tbut added significantly to his income. “When I first knew Elvis,” Parker once said with pride, 
“he had a million dollars’ worth of talent. Now he has a million dollars.”81
Nineteen fifty-six also saw Presley make an eventful series of television appearances that 
further broadened his reach and impact and generated no small amount of scandal. His first appearances came on the Dorsey Brothers show, but he caused his biggest stir on the show of 
Milton Berle, where he did a version of “Hound Dog” on which his swiveling hips generated 
audible excitement from the studio audience and a wave of public outcry in the national me-dia.
82 Steve Allen tamed the singer by having him sing to an actual basset hound, after which 
Presley landed a coveted $50,000 series of slots on The Ed Sullivan Show. Anticipating the 
objections of his family audience, Sullivan had Presley filmed only from the waist up. However, 
nothing could contain the sex appeal of Elvis the Pelvis, as his detractors called him. Presley 
used one of his Sullivan appearances to debut the title song from his first film, Love Me Tender. The song became a number one pop hit, and the film catapulted Presley to stardom in yet an-other medium.
Presley recorded some quality material before his 1958–1960 stint in the army. “Hound 
Dog” writers Leiber and Stoller were brought in to write “Don’t” and “Jailhouse Rock,” the title song for his third and best movie. Writer Otis Blackwell followed up “Don’t Be Cruel” with “ All Shook 
u
p” in 1957. In 1958, “One Night” came close to recapturing the excitement 
of his Sun recordings. At RCA, however, the stripped-down energy and straightforwardness of 
the Sun sound largely gave way to bloated productions (supervised by Chet Atkins) and syrupy background choruses by the Jordanaires—encouraging Presley to indulge the pop tendencies that had always been part of his musical aesthetic. The blues and country aura of the Presley myth never adequately captured the range of styles that shaped the singer. The songs he cut for his mother in 1953, “My Happiness” and “That’s When Your Heartaches Begin,” had been popular hits for the Ink Spots. At the time he made his first commercial recordings, his sing -
ing idol was Dean Martin. Following military service, he reentered popular music through a television special with Frank Sinatra, who by this time had become a vicious opponent of rock 
‘n’ roll. His inclination toward pop conventions was evident in his ar-dent gushing on “Love Me Tender.” It emerged full-blown in a num-ber of releases he made after the army, such as “ Are You Lonesome 
Tonight,” written in 1926; “Surrender,” adapted from “Come Back to 
Sorrento”; and reputedly his own favorite, “It’s Now or Never,” a pop-oriented, Latin-flavored number, based loosely on “O Sole Mio” by Mario Lanza, Presley’s favorite opera star.
There has never been another career quite like that of Elvis Presley’s. He charted 149 
Top Forty hits on Billboard’s Hot 100 and 92 long-playing records (LPs) on the album charts—all this with some of the most insipid material ever recorded. His soundtrack albums—from some of the worst (though profitable) films imaginable—almost invariably entered the Top Forty. “The fact is, I think, that Elvis was too well suited to success,” Peter Guralnick has said. “He was intelligent, adaptable, ambitious, and sure of his goals. . . . He soon settled in fact on a fairly comfortable and formulaic approach that took advantage of his wide-ranging musical background, facility in a number of styles, real talent as a quick study, and almost total lack of taste.”
83 He briefly redeemed himself as the quintessential rock ‘n’ roller in a 1968 television HEAR MORE
“Hound Dog” on 
MySearchLabAt RCA, the stripped-down energy and 
straightforwardness of the Sun sound 
largely gave way to bloated productions 
and syrupy background choruses by the 
Jordanaires—encouraging Presley to indulge the pop tendencies that had al-ways been part of his musical aesthetic.
 C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 119
In 1953, Willie Mae “Big Mama” Thornton had a hit on the r&b charts 
with the song “Hound Dog,” delivered with fearsome, gritty conviction by 
Thornton’s huge voice, Johnny Otis’s band, and the smoking guitar work of 
Pete Lewis. The song was written by the well-known r&b songwriters Jerry 
Lieber and Mike Stoller (although both Otis and Thornton have claimed the actual songwriting credit). Sometime after that, Elvis Presley heard the song performed by a Las Vegas lounge musician named Freddie Bell. It 
was Bell’s version, with its adapted lyrics, that Presley recorded for RCA in 
1956 (as the B-side of the single “Don’t Be Cruel”).
It was common for white musicians to cover an African American musician’s r&b hit, often replacing suggestive lyr-
ics with more conservative fare that the major labels deemed more palatable for the white listening audience. (On Elvis’s recording, the original lyrics, which were much more interesting and made more sense, are replaced with two verses that he alternates repeatedly throughout the song.) The financial success of white performers’ versions of popular r&b tunes also frequently overshadowed the success of the original—an oft-repeated story in the history of American popular music, 
especially in the 1950s and 1960s. While it was said that Elvis consciously avoided covering r&b tunes that were still “on the charts,” he recorded dozens of cover versions. After all, Elvis was not a songwriter, and his fame came from lending his own personal performance style to other people’s music. “Hound Dog” was a huge hit for Elvis, staying at number one on the pop charts for eleven weeks in the summer of 1956.
Musical Style Notes
“Hound Dog” is a twelve-bar blues song with the stepped-up tempo; slapping bass; and percussive, “twangy” guitar 
sound characteristic of the rockabilly style associated with Sun Records. However, Elvis had left Sun by the time he re-corded “Hound Dog” and was now with RCA. With this change, we hear an important departure from Sun Records’ rocka-
billy sound: the use of the drum set. Sam Phillips’s early Sun recordings didn’t emphasize drum-set percussion, but now, 
drummer D. J. Fontana is right up front in the mix, especially in the drum “roll” that you hear in the transition between verses. (You can also hear hand-claps in the background during the sung verses.) Along with bass player Bill Black, the rhythm section provides a great foundation for the famous high-energy guitar solos Scotty Moore created for this track.
Musical “Road Map”
TIMINGS COMMENTS
0:00–0:17 Verse 1 (12-bar blues form)
As in Big Mama Thornton’s original, Elvis starts singing a cappella (no instruments); the 
 
instruments come in on the downbeat at the words “hound dog.”
Note hand-claps.Strong, foregrounded drum sound
0:18–0:33 Verse 2
0:34–0:50 Verse 1 repeats.
0:50–1:06 Scotty Moore’s guitar solo, over the verse form
(Note background vocals singing “ah.”)
1:06–1:22 Verse 2 repeats.Hand-claps return.
1:22–1:38 Another Scotty Moore guitar solo over verse form
(Return of background vocals singing “ah.”)
1:38–1:54 Verse 2 repeats.Hand-claps return.
1:54–2:09 Verse 1 repeats.
2:09–2:13 “Tag” (short phrase and final chord)
Listening Guide 9“Hound Dog”
Artist:
 
Elvis Presley
Music/Lyrics by Jerry Lieber  
and Mike Stoller (and possibly  Big Mama Thornton)
Label:
 
RCA (1956)120  ROC k IN ’ O u Tspecial. “If you’re looking for trouble,” sneered Elvis into the camera, completely outfitted in 
black leather and looking his greased-back best, “you’ve come to the right place.” In addition to the obligatory big production numbers, he was joined on stage by old musical friends such as 
Scotty Moore and drummer D. J. Fontana. In those moments, he recaptured the “young Elvis” 
pictured on his 1992 memorial postage stamp.
84
When Sam Phillips sold Presley’s contract to RCA—making what, in retrospect, appears 
to have been a miscalculation of monumental proportions—he thought he had another artist 
who would be bigger than Elvis. In 1956, Carl Perkins’ “Blue Suede Shoes” climbed to num -
ber two on the pop charts, making it Sun’s best-selling record to date; the number one pop 
song, tellingly, was “Heartbreak Hotel,” Presley’s debut release on RCA. “Blue Suede Shoes” is considered a contender as the first rock ‘n’ roll record because of its cross-over success in all markets.
85 Perkins’s early rockabilly recordings, such as “Gone, Gone, Gone,” hinted at a 
fusion of blues and country. “That’s what rockabilly music is,” he once said, “a country man’s 
song with a black man’s rhythm.”86 Just as Perkins was about to take off commercially after the 
success of “Blue Suede Shoes,” he was nearly killed in a car crash. Perkins never entered the Top Forty again, and his career never regained its momentum. Still, his influence on rock ‘n’ 
roll is undeniable. In 1964, the Beatles invited him to a session where they recorded three of 
his songs—“Honey Don’t,” “Everybody’s Trying to Be My Baby,” and his adaptation of an old Blind Lemon Jefferson song, “Matchbox.”
The uncontrollable Jerry Lee Lewis—inspired by a long line of hard-rocking piano men, 
including boogie woogie greats on the r&b side and artists like Moon Mullican on the country side—was the rock ‘n’ roller who did the most to keep Sun in the black. Typical of rockabil-lies, Lewis grew up poor amid that convoluted Southern mixture of music and religion, sin and depravity. Nicknamed the 
k
iller in his adolescence, Lewis had a personal life peppered 
with debauchery and violence (two of his six wives died under mysterious circumstances). He 
quit high school after logging a record twenty-nine Fs and was expelled from Bible school. Once forced to take second billing to Chuck Berry, Lewis reportedly closed his set with a fren-zied rendition of “Whole Lotta Shakin’ Goin’ On” as he set fire to the piano. With the crowd boosted to fever pitch, he walked off stage and calmly said to Berry: “Follow that, Nigger.”
87
With his boogie-powered “pumping piano,” as his instrument was billed, Lewis turned 
out three Top Ten pop hits in a row for Sun—“Whole Lotta Shakin’ Goin’ On” (1956), “Great 
Balls of Fire” (1957), and “Breathless” (1958). “Whole Lotta Shakin’” not only went to number 
three on the pop charts, it topped the c&w and the r&b charts as well. Shortly after “
 
Breathless,” 
Lewis left his second wife and, without divorcing her, married his thirteen-year-old cousin 
Myra, whose father played bass in his band. The press had a field day with Lewis, who was on tour in Great Britain. The remaining concerts were canceled and Lewis returned to a career in shambles. He hit the pop charts three more times but was never again a pop headliner.
Other white Southern artists also passed through Sun. Warren Smith recorded the mem-
orable (and racist) “
u
bangi Stomp” before his short-lived country career on Liberty. Charlie 
Rich began as a session musician at Sun and had a pop hit with “Lonely Weekends” in 1960. He became a major country star a decade later. Conway Twitty recorded for Sun under his real 
name, Harold Jenkins, but none of his recordings were released. Roy Orbison cut a version of “Ooby Dooby” at Sun before switching to Monument. Johnny Cash started at Sun in 1955;  C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 121after a few country hits (including “Folsom Prison Blues”), his “I Walk the Line” went pop Top 
Twenty in 1956. Cash switched to Columbia in 1958 and embarked on a career that included gold and platinum albums, films, and even his own television show.
The sound Sam Phillips had created—soulful white singers 
from the grassroots, embellished by tape-delay echo and backed 
by instrumentation (slap bass, electric guitar, pumping piano) that straddled c&w and r&b perfectly—defined one of the major strands of rock ‘n’ roll and set the stage for other white rock ‘n’ rollers who could be marketed as rockabillies. Impressed by RCA’s success with Presley, Capitol signed Gene Vincent (Vincent Eugene 
 
Craddock) 
from Norfolk, Virginia. On Vincent’s first release, “Be-Bop-A-Lula” (1956), Capitol engineers pumped up his naturally gentle voice with “flutter echo” to achieve 
“a perverse, gothic performance.”
88 Of nineteen Vincent releases, only two more made the 
Top Forty in the 
u
nited States—“Lotta Lovin’” (1957) and “Dance to the Bop” (1958)—but 
he was revered in Great Britain. Eddie Cochran (“Summertime Blues,” 1958), another would-
be Elvis, joined Vincent for a British tour in 1960, but he was killed in a car accident on the 
way to the airport after the tour. Vincent, also injured in the crash, never recovered from the incident.
Buddy Holly was another artist who enjoyed greater success in Great Britain than in the 
u
nited States. Indeed, some of Holly’s hits in Great Britain—“It’s So Easy,” for example—did 
not even chart on this side of the Atlantic. One of a number of Texas-born rockabillies to reach the pop audience, Holly was probably positioned better than anyone to follow in Presley’s foot-steps. After a few missteps on Decca, Holly was released from the label. He returned to his na-tive Lubbock, Texas, formed the Crickets, then headed to Clovis, New Mexico, to record with 
producer Norman Petty, a collaboration that proved to be worthwhile for all concerned. Their first release, “That’ll Be the Day” (1957)—a revved-up, heavily electrified version of a number Holly had cut for Decca—turned out to be their best and most successful recording. At the time, however, it was turned down by Roulette, Atlantic, Columbia, and RCA, before being re-leased on Brunswick where it shot straight to number one and then remained in the Top Forty for sixteen weeks. Ironically, Bob Thiele, a Decca producer, had engineered a contract for the Crickets on Brunswick and a solo deal for Holly on Coral, both Decca subsidiaries, after Holly’s relationship with Decca was terminated. Holly and the Crickets recorded fifteen more songs in Petty’s studio. “Peggy Sue,” backed with “Everyday” (1957), on Coral, was credited only to Buddy Holly. A month later, “Oh Boy!,” backed with “Not Fade Away,” on Brunswick, was cred-ited to the Crickets.
In retrospect, it seems difficult to imagine that anyone could mistake Buddy Holly and 
the Crickets for a black r&b act. In the 1950s, however, rock ‘n’ roll was an expression of cul -
tural upheaval that was rife with racial ambiguities. As country as “That’ll Be the Day” may sound today, it was an r&b hit in 1957. In fact, Holly was the only major rockabilly act who never had a country hit. Holly and the Crickets were booked, sight unseen, into the Apollo Theater. “I knew his records,” recalled singer Leslie 
u
ggams, who saw that performance. “You 
thought, ‘Hey, another brother out there doing his number.’ Then this white guy comes out 
and everybody says, ‘Oh, that’s Buddy Holly!’ . . . You know, here comes this guy with these The sound Sam Phillips had created—
soulful white singers from the grass-
roots, embellished by tape-delay echo 
and backed by instrumentation (slap 
bass, electric guitar, pumping piano) that straddled c&w and r&b perfectly—defined one of the major strands of rock 
‘n’ roll.
122  ROC k IN ’ O u Tglasses and funny-looking suit and stuff. I said, ‘He’s white, isn’t he?’ But he was terrific.”89 
Crossing personal racial barriers as well, Holly married Maria Elena Santiago, a Puerto Ri-
can receptionist at Peer-Southern Music in New York. A new wife and the lure of New York 
precipitated a split for Holly, the Crickets, and Petty. Holly’s last Top Forty hit with the group 
was “It Doesn’t Matter Anymore” (1959), a pop-oriented Paul Anka tune that reached the pop charts one month after Holly’s untimely death in 1959.
Holly was not the only Texas rockabilly to make it. Petty had already had a notable rock 
‘n’ roll success with another Texas group, the Rhythm Orchids, for whom he produced “Party Doll” and “I’m Stickin’ with You.” Roulette Records bought the masters and released the cuts separately as “Party Doll” by Buddy 
k
nox and “I’m Stickin’ with You” by Jimmy Bowen with 
the Rhythm Orchids. “Stickin’” went to number fourteen and “Party Doll” hit number one. Roy Orbison was another Texas rockabilly who first recorded in Petty’s studio, then quickly moved 
to Sun, RCA, and finally to Monument, where he made his biggest hits. “Only the Lonely” (1960), his first Top Ten pop hit, featured a heart-wrenching vocal in a call-and-response style with a hint of Latin flavor; it embodied the diverse cultural influences of rock ‘n’ roll in classic style. Orbison’s amazing vocal range and crystal-clear upper register lent a distinctive sound to the releases that followed—“Blue Angel” (1960), “Running Scared” and “Crying” (1961), and “Dream Baby” (1962). Perhaps because of his unique vocal talents, Orbison was among the few rockabilly artists to ride out the British Invasion. His biggest hit, “Oh, Pretty Woman” (1964), became number one at a time when the 
u
.S. pop charts were dominated by the Beatles and a 
host of other British groups.
Somewhat outside the Sun orbit, but well within the boundaries of rockabilly, were the 
Everly Brothers, among the most successful of the country-influenced rock ‘n’ rollers. Their 
close harmonies were characteristic of country music, but their syncopated guitar riffs, po-
sitioned as instrumental responses to their vocal leads, suggested possible African American influences. In the early 1950s, brothers Don and Phil went to Nashville to sing and write songs for Acuff-Rose. When “Bye Bye Love” (1957) went to number two on the pop charts, they gave Nashville a new profile in rock ‘n’ roll and launched a career that included twenty-six Top Forty pop hits, including four that went to number one: “Wake 
u
p Little Susie” (1957), “ All I 
Have to Do Is Dream” and “Bird Dog” (1958), and “Cathy’s Clown” (1960).
The appeal of country-influenced rock ‘n’ roll enabled a number of major label coun-
try acts to experience success in the pop market. Columbia’s Guy Mitchell recorded “Sing-ing the Blues” (1956) and “Heartaches by the Number” (1959), which both went to number one; his “Rock-A-Billy” (1957) hit the Top Ten. Marty Robbins, also with Columbia, broke the Top Three three times with “ A White Sport Coat (and a Pink Carnation)” (1957), “El Paso” (1959), and “Don’t Worry” (1961). Capitol had Sonny James (“Young Love”), Tommy Sands (“Teen-Age Crush”), and Ferlin Husky (“Gone”), all of whom had their biggest hits in 1957. Patsy Cline (“Walking after Midnight,” “I Fall to Pieces,” “Crazy”), signed by Decca, was a straight country artist who crossed over to the pop market on the heels of country rock. Con -
way Twitty on MGM made the Top Ten three times with “It’s Only Make Believe” (1958), “Danny Boy” (1959), and “Lonely Blue Boy” (1960). Don Gibson hit the Top Ten with “Oh, Lonesome Me” for RCA in 1958. C ROSSING  Cu LT u RES 123Rockabilly was no kinder to women than was the rest of 
rock ‘n’ roll, and it wasn’t because women couldn’t sing rockabilly. 
 
Charlene Arthur and Janis Martin (the Female Elvis) on RCA, Rose 
Maddox on Capitol, and Barbara Pittman and Jean Chapel (a.k.a. 
Mattie O’Neill) on Sun could deliver the goods, but a lack of interest in these artists, a dearth of good material, weak promotion, and/or outright male hostility kept them from the attention of the mainstream public.
90 Except for Capitol’s hard-rocking Wanda 
Jackson, who edged into the Top Forty three times beginning with “Let’s Have a Party” (1960), 
only one other nationally successful woman could be included in a discussion of rockabilly—the 
diminutive Brenda Mae Tarpley (a.k.a. Brenda Lee). Signed by Decca at eleven, she turned out 
twenty-nine Top Forty hits between 1960 and 1967, including the suggestive “Sweet Nothin’s” and two number one ballads, “I’m Sorry” and “I Want to Be Wanted.” Like Orbison, she rode out the British onslaught with dignity (and hits), then returned to more traditional country roots for the remainder of her career.
The energy of early rock ‘n’ roll had crossed lines of age, class, race, and culture in a country that 
seldom takes kindly to social upheaval and certainly didn’t during the conservative 1950s. The 
music was ubiquitous, issuing from every region in the country. As soon as rock ‘n’ roll captured the hearts, minds, and bodies of teenagers across all demographics, some people linked it with ev-ery perceived social ill from juvenile delinquency and miscegenation to atheism and communism. Asa Carter, executive secretary of the Alabama White Citizens Council, put the threat into stark words when he said in 1956, “[T]he obscenity and vulgarity of the rock ‘n’ roll music is obviously a means by which the white man and his children can be driven to the level with a ‘nigra’. . . . If we choose to call it the Communist ideology, I think we hit it fairly on the head.”
91 While Carter’s 
 
position was extreme, rhetoric like this pushed all the emotional buttons of white middle-class par -
ents concerned about the new sound. If some variant of rock ‘n’ roll was “here to stay,” as Danny 
and the Juniors had prophesied in 1958, nowhere was it written that social pressures could not 
alter its character.
Sam Phillips may have been the first rock ‘n’ roll producer to look for “a white man with 
the Negro sound,” but he was not the only one. Ace Records tried with Frankie Ford and Atlantic with Bobby Darin. To their credit, these artists had at least some musical connection to the styles they interpreted. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said of the next generation of white rockers, who mustered little more than boy-next-door good looks and a feeble Elvis sneer. They had few, if any, identifiable links to previous rock ‘n’ roll styles, but youthful attractiveness and some sem-blance of rhythm enabled them to be successfully marketed as rock ‘n’ roll singers. Such a musical 
development, though possibly inevitable, served the purposes of those who were terrified by the cultural implications of rock ‘n’ roll. The rock ‘n’ roll facelift of the late 1950s , as we shall see, 
was but the most visible manifestation of a much broader reaction to the music.
LEARN MORE
Chapter Test on 
MySearchLabRockabilly was no kinder to women 
than was the rest of rock ‘n’ roll, and 
it wasn’t because women couldn’t sing 
rockabilly.
124  The Empire Strikes 
Back: The Reaction to Rock ‘n’ Roll5
By the late 1950s, rock ‘n’ roll had changed the popular  
music landscape irrevocably and, in so doing, was signaling the coming 
of still broader social change. The prospect of such change precipitated 
unbridled enthusiasm and vicious backlash in equal proportions. Eco-
nomically, the music had enhanced the fortunes of what seemed, to some, to be untutored writers and artists, upstart independent record compa-
nies, and wildly eccentric deejays. In essence, rock ‘n’ roll had turned the structure of the music business on its head. Aesthetically, it had encouraged a tilt toward African American sensibilities and working-class styles. Thus, to some, it challenged the existing canons of cul-tural value and public taste. Socially, the music had threatened to upset the separation of races and classes that had guided not just the operations of the music industry but the dynamics of all social interaction to date. Depending on how one felt about these issues, rock ‘n’ roll was 
either celebrated as a true democratization of culture or decried as the destruction of Western civilization.
Given its impact and the conservative political climate in which it developed, it is not 
terribly surprising that rock ‘n’ roll became a target for repression. As surely as the 1950s are remembered musically as the decade of rock ‘n’ roll, they are remembered politically as the Eisenhower era. Two more diametrically opposed images would be hard to find. General, 
and then President, Dwight D. Eisenhower was as old-fashioned, con-ventional, bland, polite, and conservative as rock ‘n’ roll was youthful, innovative, wild, intrusive, and rebellious. Eisenhower became presi-dent in 1953 while U.S. troops were fighting communists in Korea and while Senator Joe McCarthy was feverishly inventing them at 
home. Eisenhower’s vice president, Richard M. Nixon, began pushing to contain communism in Vietnam, eventually precipitating cataclysmic political reverberations in the United States and around the world in the next decade.LEARN MORE
Learning Objectives 
on MySearchLab
President, Dwight D. Eisenhower was 
as old-fashioned, conventional, bland, 
polite, and conservative as rock ‘n’ roll 
was youthful, innovative, wild, intrusive, 
and rebellious.
 Th E  E MPIRE  S TRIKES  B ACK 125As if culture could be similarly contained, the following middle-of-the-road releases 
 
appeared in Billboard as the ten best-selling records for 1953, the year Eisenhower took office:
 
1.
 
Song from Moulin Rouge—Percy Faith
 
2.
 
Vaya con Dios—Les Paul and Mary Ford
 
3.
 
Doggie in the Window—Patti Page
 
4.
 
I’m Walking behind You—Eddie Fisher
 
5.
 
You, You, You—Ames Brothers
 
6.
 
Till I Waltz Again with You—Teresa Brewer
 
7.
 
April in Portugal—Les Baxter
 
8.
 
No Other Love—Perry Como
 
9.
 
Don’t Let the Stars Get in Your Eyes—Perry Como
 
10.
 
I Believe—Frankie Laine
Uninspiring political leaders and insipid popular music ran in tandem with another aspect 
of U.S. life in the 1950s—mind-numbing conformity. Battle-weary veterans, seeking to forget the 
ravages of war, sought peace, quiet, and prosperity in a new place—suburbia. Entrance to this tran-quil environment did not come without a price. The white middle-class men of David Reisman’s “lonely crowd” commuted to work daily, where they became “organization men,” mere cogs in the machine of the expanding U.S. economy; their wives stayed at home, even lonelier and more iso-lated. Teens had to endure the regimentation of school. In its essential features—compartmental -
ization of knowledge, passive reception of information, pressure to achieve, competition for grades, and regulation of behavior—school was preparation for work.
Unfortunately, rigidity and conformity, so desirable in the workplace, conflicted sharply 
with the demands of the new consumer economy. The successful conversion to a peacetime econ-omy depended in large part on creating an increased demand for consumer items. The single most important strategy in this effort was (and remains) the pleasure principle: If it makes you feel good, buy it. The most obvious application of this principle was the use of sexuality to sell products. Thus, a contradiction existed: The traits encouraged in the Protestant work ethic—dis-cipline, frugality, asceticism, and abstinence—are best represented in a rather rigid, authoritarian, and sexually repressed personality. The ideal consumer, on the other hand, is an impulsive hedo-nist, given to boundless extravagance and instant gratification—that is to say, sexually more lib-erated. For teenagers in the 1950s, this tension was experienced as a conflict between the official values of school, family, and church and the reality of their leisure-time activities.
1
Postwar prosperity made teenagers an identifiable consumer group, and manufacturers 
began to produce products specifically for a youth market. Buying rock ‘n’ roll records, for ex-
ample, prepared teens to be good consumers, and the music was used effectively to sell other 
products. At the same time, full entrance into adulthood and financial independence was de -
layed as more and more teenagers completed high school and college. As teens sought escape 
from school and parents, leisure became their alternative world and rock ‘n’ roll its major port of entry. For many adults, however, the message of “rocking around the clock,” not to mention rocking and rolling “all night long” in “sixty minute” intervals, undermined the values of work, a necessary condition for consumption. Indeed, rock ‘n’ roll represented everything that white, HEAR MORE
Audio links for this 
1953 Top Ten List on MySearchLab126  ROCKIN ’ OUTmiddle-class parents feared: It was urban, it was sexual, and most of it was black. As a result, 
this music was frequently denounced by adults as the “devil’s music,” as a National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) strategy for recruiting young whites, or as a 
communist plot to undermine the moral fiber of the younger generation.
The Established Powers Fight Back
The fortunes of the music industry as a whole nearly tripled during the vintage rock ‘n’ roll 
years: Revenues from record sales climbed from $213 million in 1954 to $603 million in 1959. The question is: 
h
ow much of this expansion can be attributed to rock ‘n’ roll?
While market-share data broken down by musical style is difficult to come by, Charlie 
Gillett has offered some indication of relative proportions. In 1955, of the fifty-one records 
to make the pop Top Ten, only eight were rock ‘n’ roll—or 15.7 percent. In contrast, in 1959, thirty-eight of the eighty-nine Top Ten records were rock ‘n’ roll—42.7 percent. In this same five-year span, Top Ten pop hits by major record companies decreased from forty to thirty, while those by independent companies increased from eleven to fifty-nine. In other words, in that time period, independent record companies went from a 21.6 percent share of the pop mar-ket to a 66.3 percent share of a pop market that had grown roughly three times larger.
2
The major labels had only themselves to blame for this situation. In the late 1940s and 
early 1950s, when countless independent labels sprang up to cash in on the growing demand 
for rhythm and blues (r&b), ideological blinders prevented the mainstream music industry 
from operating in its own economic self-interest. After it was clear 
that rock ‘n’ roll was here to stay, the industry giants responded with strategies that ranged from ostrich-like stances to some talent buying, from the widespread practice of cover records (making new versions of original releases) to promoting alternative styles of music. When these efforts failed, the established industry powers—artists, labels, and (most prominently) the American Society of Composers, Authors, 
and Publishers (ASCAP)—joined forces with the U.S. government to suppress the music in a campaign that Russell Sanjek has labeled the “War on Rock.”
3
Given Columbia’s historical connection to African American music (its vaults contained 
some of the best recordings of Bessie Smith, Robert Johnson, Louis Armstrong, Fletcher 
 h
enderson, Duke Ellington, and Count Basie), the label’s comparatively lukewarm response 
to rock ‘n’ roll is somewhat surprising. Mitch Miller, Columbia’s artist and repertoire chief, 
 
reportedly despised rock ‘n’ roll personally but, at one point in 1955, he defended the crossover of rhythm and blues in the New York Times as part of “a steady—and healthy—breaking down of  
color barriers.”
4 At Columbia, he devoted his time and energy to perfecting the pop production 
techniques used with artists like Frankie Laine, Jo Stafford, Rosemary Clooney, and Doris Day. 
These techniques had made Columbia the most successful label in the country.5 Only in 1958, 
when the tide of rock ‘n’ roll had proved more unstoppable than Miller had earlier assumed, did he publicly denounce the music—even as the label signed Johnny Cash and Carl Perkins—for 
its “paralyzing monotony” and lack of “entertainment value for anyone over fourteen.”
6
In the late 1940s and early 1950s, 
when countless independent labels 
sprang up to cash in on the growing 
demand for rhythm and blues (r&b), 
ideological blinders prevented the main-stream music industry from operating in its own economic self-interest.
 Th E  E MPIRE  S TRIKES  B ACK 127Early in the 1950s, the emotionally unhinged Johnny Ray could have provided Columbia 
with a way into rock ‘n’ roll. Following the phenomenal success of his heart-wrenching, tear-
jerking, shirt-ripping performance of “Cry”—number one on the pop charts for eleven weeks—
Ray was switched from the OKeh subsidiary to the parent Columbia label. 
h
owever, after 
ASCAP had Ray’s successful cover of the Drifters’ “Such a Night” banned from the airwaves in 
1954 for sexual suggestiveness, Columbia may have thought that a deeper commitment to the performer would be more trouble than it was worth. Still, he turned out a few more hits before his career ran out of steam. Except for a brief and inexplicable flirtation with the outrageous Screamin’ Jay 
h
awkins (“I Put a Spell on You,” 1956) on OKeh, the closest Columbia came to 
rock ‘n’ roll prior to 1958 was the silken balladry of African American baritone Johnny Mathis (“It’s Not for Me to Say,” “Chances Are,” “The Twelfth of Never”).
At the Radio Corporation of America (RCA), 
h
ugo Winterhalter was no better than 
Miller at producing rock ‘n’ roll, and artists like Vaughn Monroe, Dinah Shore, and Eddie 
Fisher were certainly no better at performing it than Columbia’s artists.7 however, in the 
 
Sarnoff tradition of covering all bases, RCA’s strategy for dealing with the new sound was 
simply to buy the most promising rock ‘n’ roll star it could—Elvis Presley. It was the smartest 
move the company ever made. Presley carried the faltering record division for years. Impressed 
by RCA’s success, other major labels searched for the “new Elvis.” Capitol found Gene Vincent. Conway Twitty landed at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM), where his country background 
 
enabled him to create that delicate balance of country and pop that found acceptance as rock ‘n’ roll. 
h
is biggest hit, “It’s Only Make Believe,” “was one of the many records of 1958 that 
succeeded in absorbing elements of rock ‘n’ roll into the tradition of melodramatic ballads that popular music arrangers enjoyed working with.”
8
Twitty was just one of the pop-oriented, country-influenced singers to which the major 
labels gravitated on their first forays into rock ‘n’ roll territory—given the racial fears that rock 
‘n’ roll conjured up, it was probably considered a safer move. Decca had set the example by sign-
ing Bill 
h
aley in 1953, eighteen months ahead of the other major labels, but it failed to replicate 
the pattern when it turned down Buddy 
h
olly and the Crickets in 1957. As noted in Chapter 4, 
however,  
h
olly and company were signed to two of Decca’s subsidiaries, Coral and Brunswick. 
Coral, founded in 1949 as an r&b label, was, ironically, one of the labels in the early 1950s that 
issued cover records in a systematic attempt to blunt the crossover appeal of early rock ‘n’ roll.
Covering the Bases
Recording multiple versions of a song by various artists in different styles was nothing new 
in the 1950s, but using this strategy to sanitize a particular style of music was new. In most cases, white artists on major labels covered black artists recording 
for independent labels.
9 Cover records were often released during 
the expected chart life of the original and, because of the superior 
distribution channels and promotional powers of the majors, fre -
quently outsold the original. They altered stylistic elements and of-
ten doctored lyrics. Bill 
h
aley’s 1954 cover of Joe Turner’s “Shake, 
Rattle, and Roll,” for example, cleaned up the original version by Bill Haley’s 1954 cover of Joe Turner’s 
“Shake, Rattle, and Roll,” for example, 
cleaned up the original version by re-
placing sexual phrases with fashion 
statements and moving the action from the bedroom to the kitchen.
128  ROCKIN ’ OUTreplacing sexual phrases with fashion statements and moving the action from the bedroom to 
the kitchen.
The practice began in earnest in 1953 when June Valli recorded “Crying in the Chapel” 
for RCA. At its release, three other versions of the song—two country and one r&b—were also 
out. The r&b release by Sonny Til and the Orioles had crossed over to the pop market and was enjoying considerable success until it was eclipsed by the Valli cover, which became one of the best-selling records of the year. RCA scored another coup with Perry Como’s cover of “Ko Ko Mo,” a lively novelty song originally recorded by Gene and Eunice for Combo in 1954, then rerecorded by the same group for Aladdin. This rerecording became an r&b hit. Rare for the time, it was covered by two independent labels using black acts—Parrot, with the Flamingos, and Modern, with Marvin and Johnny. Their efforts were thwarted when three major labels also covered the song. Columbia used Tony Bennett, and Mercury had a hit with the Crew 
Cuts’ version, but RCA’s release by Perry Como became the most popular.
Of the major companies, Decca and Mercury had the best luck with covers. Bill 
h
aley’s 
“Shake, Rattle, and Roll” cover for Decca became the artist’s first gold record. Theresa Brewer and the McGuire Sisters, on Decca’s Coral subsidiary, also made successful cover records. Brewer’s 1956 cover of Fats Domino’s “Bo Weevil” went to number seventeen; Domino’s orig-inal reached only thirty-five. The McGuire Sisters’ cover of “Sincerely” by the Moonglows hit number one on the pop charts and became the seventh best-selling pop single of 1955.
Mercury used Georgia Gibbs to cover Etta James’s “Wallflower” (a.k.a. “Roll with Me, 
h
enry”) with a cleaned-up version, “Dance with Me, 
h
enry.” James’s version sold 400,000 copies 
for Modern, but the Gibbs cover hit the 1 million mark. This was only the beginning for 
 
Mercury, 
which cashed in with two Canadian groups, the Diamonds and the Crew Cuts. The Crew Cuts 
systematically pillaged the r&b charts after their cover of the Chords’ “Sh’Boom” (originally 
on Atlantic’s Cat label) became the fifth best-selling song of 1954. In addition to “Ko Ko Mo,” the group covered the Penguins’ “Earth Angel” (Dootone), Nappy Brown’s “Don’t Be Angry” 
 
(Savoy), and the Charms’ “Gum Drop” (De Luxe). Between 1956 and 1961, the Diamonds had hits 
with covers of Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers’ “Why Do Fools Fall in Love,” the Gladiolas’ “Little Darlin’,” the G-Clef ’s “Ka-Ding-Dong,” and the Danleers’ “One Summer Night.”
The label that really worked the cover market was Dot Records, launched by Randy Wood 
in Gallatin, Tennessee, in 1951.
10 Two of Dot’s female acts were quite successful covering a wide 
variety of rock ‘n’ roll. The Fontane Sisters hit pop number one with “
h
earts of Stone,” outsell-
ing a version by the Charms (who had covered the original by the Jewels), and also recorded cuts 
by Boyd Bennett and the Rockets, the Teen Queens, and Fats Domino. Gale Storm had Top Ten 
hits with Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers’ “Why Do Fools Fall in Love,” Smiley Lewis’s “I 
h
ear You Knocking,” and the Charms’ “Ivory Tower,” among others. The company also had on 
its roster the singer who most often serves as the whipping boy for cultural theft—Pat Boone.
Pat Boone has been the lightning rod for criticism about covering other artists, not 
 
because he did it more than anyone else but because he seemed to be more out of his element than most. 
h
is antiseptic versions of Little Richard’s “Tutti Frutti” and “Long Tall Sally” alone 
would be enough to make the point. For many, the white buck shoes that became his signature only reinforced the racist implications of his white-bread delivery. Boone’s cover of Fats Domino’s 
“ Ain’t That a Shame” (1955) became his first number one pop single; his second number one HEAR MORE
Pat Boone on 
MySearchLab Th E  E MPIRE  S TRIKES  B ACK 129Musical Style Notes
Boone’s smooth, mellifluous vocal style was part of his great appeal 
and owes more to pop crooners Bing Crosby or Perry Como than to Little Richard or Fats Domino. In terms of musical structure, tempo, and length, 
Boone’s cover of “Tutti Frutti” is almost an exact copy of Little Richard’s, 
but the vocal style and the clearly enunciated lyrics are utterly different from Richard’s growling, high-tenor, powerhouse style.
Some of the lyrics have been changed here (even though Little Richard’s had already been “cleaned up” for his 
recording). Richard’s “She rocks to the east, she rocks to the west” was changed to “I’ve been to the east, I’ve been to the west.”
One curious departure from the original comes at the end. Whereas Little Richard’s version ends with Richard 
singing the “wop-bop-a-loo-mop” line by himself, the sax has the last word on Boone’s version, punctuating the last line with one final note at the end.
Musical “Road Map”
TIMINGS COMMENTS
0:00–0:02 Begins directly with a stop-time chord hit by the band and Boone singing the famous nonsense-syllable refrain.
0:02–0:18 Refrain (12-bar blues—last 2 measures wop bop)
0:18–0:33 Verse 2 (12-bar blues form—last 4 measures stop-time)
0:33–0:49 Refrain (12-bar blues—last 2 measures wop bop)
0:49–1:04 Verse 1 (12-bar blues form—last 4 measures stop-time)
1:04–1:19 Refrain (12-bar blues—last 2 measures wop bop)
1:19–1:34 Sax solo over the 12-bar blues form of a verse
1:35–1:50 Refrain (12-bar blues—last 2 measures wop bop)
1:50–2:06 Verse 2 (again, 12-bar blues form—last 4 measures stop-time)
2:06–2:22 Refrain (12-bar blues—last 2 measures wop bop) Note the one solitary sax note right at the end!
Listening Guide 10“Tutti Frutti”
Artist: Pat Boone
Music/Lyrics by Little Richard  
(and Dorothy La Bostrie)
Label: Dot (1956)130  ROCKIN ’ OUTsingle, though not strictly speaking a cover record, was “I Almost Lost My Mind” (1956), 
originally recorded years earlier by Ivory Joe 
h
unter. 
h
e also cleaned up the El Dorados’ “ At 
My Front Door” and the Flamingos’ “I’ll Be 
h
ome.” Once he was firmly established in the rock 
‘n’ roll market, Boone segued into mainstream pop balladry (“Love Letters in the Sand,” “ April 
Love,” and “Moody River”) and scored thirty-eight Top Forty hits. 
h
e was rewarded in 1957 
with his own television show. That Pat Boone built his career on early rock ‘n’ roll is indisput-able; that he did so more successfully than anyone except Elvis continues to gall his detractors. To be fair, however, a comparison of “Love Letters in the Sand” with Presley’s “Love Me Tender” would yield very few stylistic differences. In the end, we are left to ponder why some of Boone’s recordings, including “Love Letters in the Sand,” sold to black buyers and why some of his 
 
covers remain better known than the originals.
All record companies make decisions based on idiosyncratic choices and dumb luck as much 
as carefully crafted business plans or scientific market analyses. The appearance of 
h
aley on 
Decca and Presley on RCA, let alone Lloyd Price on ABC-
 
Paramount, 
certainly complicates the mythology of major record companies as 
 
defenders of the musical status quo and independents as selfless pro-
moters of grassroots music. Given Columbia’s aversion to rock ‘n’ roll, why did it take a chance on Screamin’ Jay 
h
awkins, whose stage act 
included rising from a burning coffin in full voodoo regalia? Capitol nurtured an equally out-rageous performer named Esquerita, cited in Chapter Four for his influence on Little Richard. Toward the end of the 1950s, MGM signed two black rock ‘n’ roll acts—the Impalas (“Sorry  
[I Ran All the Way 
h
ome],” 1959) and Jimmy Jones (“
h
andy Man” and “Good Timin’,” 1960)—
to its Cub subsidiary. These are not the acts of 
companies that are trying to hold the cultural 
line. By the same token, independents had a pro-gressive impact because they were smart enough and flexible enough to respond to a consumer demand that would have required a consider-able shift in orientation for the majors. Even Dot, the most systematic purveyor of cover records, was sufficiently attuned to the music to sign the Dell-Vikings, whose “Come Go with Me” and “Whispering Bells” (1957) are 
 
regarded as vocal 
harmony classics. In any case, as teenagers became more adept at distinguishing originals from covers, covers became less valuable to the majors as a strategy for dealing with rock ‘n’ roll.
Pop Diversions: From Kingston Town to the Kingston Trio
The majors could rely on their catalogues or subsidies from other corporate divisions to carry 
them through a slump or a craze they thought faddish, like rock ‘n’ roll. For a brief time, it appeared as though they might have other strategies for dealing with the new music market. 
Chief among these was an attempt to divert popular tastes away from rock ‘n’ roll by promot-
ing calypso and popularized folk music from the top down.All record companies make decisions 
based on idiosyncratic choices and 
dumb luck as much as carefully crafted 
business plans or scientific market 
analyses.
Pat Boone has served as the lightning rod for 
all the race-related criticism associated with the practice of cover records. This dimension 
of his questionable contribution to rock ‘n’ roll 
has prevented him from being inducted into the Rock ‘n’ Roll Hall of Fame.
 Th E  E MPIRE  S TRIKES  B ACK 131Beginning in late 1956, RCA and Columbia began promoting U.S. interpretations of ca-
lypso. As Gillett has pointed out, this strategy had a certain logic as a way to combat the suc-
cess of the independents. Like jazz and rhythm and blues before it, calypso was black music, 
but its Latin beat gave it another sort of appeal. Meanwhile, the “novelty” character of many 
calypso songs, and accompanying lack of overt sensuality, allowed record companies to “escape having to deal with the disturbing content of rhythm and blues.”
11 had Trinidadian calypso-
nians like Lord Kitchener and the Mighty Sparrow been able to 
achieve mainstream success in the United States, the major labels 
might well have found they had a tiger by the tail. In its original 
Trinidadian form, calypso had long been a highly politicized music based on topical social commentary and often lewd depictions of male–female relations.
As it happened, the task of representing West Indian culture fell primarily to New York–
born 
h
arry Belafonte. The multitalented Belafonte started his singing career as a straight pop 
vocalist for Jubilee in 1949. In 1955, he was signed by RCA as a folk singer, recording material like “Scarlet Ribbons” and “Shenandoah.” In 1956, he made the transition to what passed for calypso in the United States with the long-playing record (LP) Calypso, the first million-selling 
LP by a solo artist, which charted for eighty-four weeks and was firmly ensconced at number one for thirty-one of them. This was an unprecedented chart run. Two hit singles from the album, “Jamaica Farewell” and “Banana Boat” (a.k.a. “Day-O”), established the tone and content of U.S. calypso: The sexual innuendo and pointed social commentary of Caribbean calypso was 
With coordinated preppy attire and college-oriented humor, the Kingston Trio swept the country with 
a pop folk repertoire that only hinted at the power of the folk revival yet to come.
In its original Trinidadian form, calypso 
had long been a highly politicized music based on topical social commentary 
and often lewd depictions of male– 
female relations.
132  ROCKIN ’ OUTdiscarded and the novelty value of the sound was emphasized. The result was well-crafted pop 
arrangements with a Latin rhythmic flavor. In retrospect, such apolitical pop calypso appears to be an ironic career choice for Belafonte, a leading civil rights activist and outspoken critic of 
injustice.
There were a few other so-called calypso hits such as the Tarriers’ “The Banana Boat 
Song” (1956) and Terry Gilkyson and the Easy Riders’ “Marianne” (1957). As it turned out, 
however, U.S. calypso, not rock ‘n’ roll, was the fad. Within two years, the sound had segued into popular folk music. When the Kingston Trio unleashed their repertoire of popular folk sounds, the music industry realized the potential power of such material. The Kingston Trio came up through the San Francisco folk scene but managed to avoid the left-wing taint that had haunted most folk artists since the McCarthy era. Perhaps their clean-cut image, brightly colored matching shirts, and upscale college humor made it difficult to think of them as po-
litically subversive. No other folk artists had ever matched their success. Signed to Capitol in 1957, they released eighteen albums that made the Top Twenty, a number of these charting for a year or more; five hit the number one spot. Some of their LPs generated hit pop singles. “Tom Dooley,” for example—an Appalachian murder ballad likely dating back to the nineteenth cen-tury—went to number one, marking a moment when, in the words of cultural historian Robert Cantwell, “the emergent commercial youth culture of the late fifties had suddenly been inter-sected by a rich and energetic tradition of folk-song scholarship and performance.”
12
Soon other, largely forgettable, folk-oriented groups, including the Limeliters, the 
 h
ighwaymen, and the Journeymen, tried their hand at the pop market. Columbia had 
 
moderate 
success with the Brothers Four (“Greenfields,” 1960). During this period, college campuses 
became fertile grounds for talent scouts (and political activists). By the time the folk revival of 
the 1960s got into full swing, it was a bottom-up phenomenon with another roster of talent, and it was allied with the burgeoning civil rights movement. This time the music industry really did have a tiger by the tail.
“Schlock Rock”: Enter the White Middle Class
By the late 1950s, the initial rush of rock ‘n’ roll excitement was over. The music by then 
had been sufficiently absorbed into the collective unconscious that singers, songwriters, and producers with no particular feel for the music’s roots or subtleties could still turn out com-
mercially viable approximations. This new reality brought forth a new generation of white, 
middle-class teen idols—Fabian, Frankie Avalon, Bobby Rydell, and others—whose roots barely scratched the surface of pop. Along with many others, they ushered in a style of music that Steve Chapple and Garofalo have referred to elsewhere as “schlock rock.”
13
In the rise of schlock rock, little separated the majors from the independents save for 
market superiority. For every Tommy Sands (“Teen-Age Crush”), Connie Francis (“Who’s 
Sorry Now”), and Sonny James (“Young Love”) who recorded for a major label, there was a 
Charlie Gracie (“Butterfly”), Annette (“Tall Paul”), and Tab 
h
unter (“Young Love”) who re-
corded for an independent. Warner and Colpix, new 
h
ollywood-related labels, contributed 
Connie Stevens (“Sixteen Reasons”) and James Darren (“Goodbye Cruel World”), respectively. 
 Th E  E MPIRE  S TRIKES  B ACK 133Whatever higher morality or artistic integrity might have been attributed to the independents 
in the early days of rock ‘n’ roll had given way to a singular commercial pop orientation.
The major hub for this commercial activity was Philadelphia, home of three pivotal in-
dependent labels—Chancellor, Cameo/Parkway, and Swan. These three labels transformed lo-
cal teenage singers into archetypal teen idols. Chancellor offered Fabian and Frankie Avalon; Cameo had Bobby Rydell; and Swan signed Freddy Cannon (from Lynn, Massachusetts, but contractually and aesthetically Philadelphian). “The focus in Philadelphia in particular was on image,” Gillett has noted. “The unsophisticated white southern singers, and the unfashionable black ones, were supplanted by kids who could be the boy-next-door, whose visual appeal was more important than their musical ability.”
14
In this regard, Chancellor led the pack. According to critic Ed Ward, co-owner Bob 
Marcucci described his label to Billboard in the late 1950s as a “school where we indoctri-
nate artists into show business.” The label reportedly worked with artists such as Frankie 
Avalon for months, teaching them how to walk, talk, and act onstage, before making a first 
record. Through such application of effort, Chancellor could turn Fabian, a sixteen-year-old high school student, into a star. As Marcucci said of Fabian: “
h
e looks a little bit like both 
Presley and Ricky Nelson. I figured he was a natural. It’s true that 
he couldn’t sing. 
h
e knew it and I knew it.”15 By the time the rest 
of the world found out, however, Fabian had racked up eight Top 
Forty hits. In a few short years, rock ‘n’ roll had degenerated from 
Sam Phillips’s dream of a white man who could sing black to a white 
high-school kid who couldn’t sing at all.
Like the majors, the new independents assembled a roster of vocalists who were, for 
the most part, pale imitations of the pop mainstays of the late 1940s and early 1950s. Once again, they were predominantly of Italian descent—Fabian (Fabiano Forte), Frankie Avalon (Francis Avalone), Bobby Rydell (Robert Ridarelli), Freddy Cannon (Frederick Picariello), Bobby Darin (Walden Robert Cassotto), Annette (Funicello), Connie Francis (Concetta Franconero), James Darren (James Ercolani), and Connie Stevens (Concetta Ingolia). Per-haps this is not surprising because entertainment and sports (as black artists and athletes 
knew only too well) have often offered “ethnic Americans” their most promising avenues for upward mobility. Still, it is noteworthy that all of these performers felt compelled to angli-cize their names.
As in the 1940s, there was an obvious, if narrow, connection between Italian American 
cultural tendencies and pop/rock crooning. Connie Francis toted up thirty-five Top Forty singles for MGM, but her two albums of Italian Favorites far outdistanced her two Greatest Hits LPs. Bobby Rydell— discovered at the age of nine by bandleader Paul Whiteman—had a best-selling single with “Volare” (1960). Bobby Darin can also be included here because when he changed his singing style to record Kurt Weill’s “Mack the Knife” (1959), his first number one single, he was aspiring to be the next Frank Sinatra, not the next Elvis Presley. Still, Darin is in something of a class by himself, as the first white artist signed to Atlantic 
subsidiary Atco in 1957, which had been promoting black artists exclusively. Two of his ear-
liest releases, “Splish Splash” and “Queen of the 
h
op,” hit the Top Ten on both the pop and 
r&b charts in 1958.HEAR MORE
Audio links on 
MySearchLabIn a few short years, rock ‘n’ roll had 
degenerated from Sam Phillips’s dream 
of a white man who could sing black 
to a white high-school kid who couldn’t 
sing at all.
The new pop orientation in rock ‘n’ roll could not be reduced to a particular ethnic affilia-
tion. By the 1960s, a second generation of heartthrobs and teen queens across white ethnic lines 
with varying degrees of talent had come to the fore. Del Shannon (“Runaway,” “
h
ats Off to Larry”) 
evidenced musical roots in the country sound of 
h
ank Williams. Gene Pitney delivered some pow-
erful, if pop-oriented, vocals on hits such as “(The Man Who Shot) Liberty Valance,” “Only Love 
Can Break a 
h
eart,” and “It 
h
urts to Be in Love.” 
h
e also distinguished himself as a writer of 
considerable note, penning classics such as “
h
ello Mary Lou” for Ricky Nelson and “
h
e’s a Rebel” 
for the Crystals. Paul Anka and Neil Sedaka, also in this group, achieved success as songwriters for 
other artists in the 1960s. Leslie Gore is positioned here, although she 
recorded one of the first feminist songs, “You Don’t Own Me” (1963).
In the end, an oversupply of artists, both male and female, con-
tributed to what we would call “Schlock Rock’s Greatest 
h
its, Vol-
umes I and II” (see the boxes). Individual differences and notable 
exceptions aside, the overwhelming social function of these artists as a group was to put a bland, white, middle-class face on rock ‘n’ roll. Gradually, but decisively, strong regional accents gave way to neutral, unlocalized voices. Raucous improvised riffs and solos on sax, guitar, 
or piano were overtaken by lavish strings and orchestral arrangements. The sexual double en-tendre was replaced by a highly romanticized vision of teenage love and/or angst.
While the second generation of schlock was overwhelmingly white, one black superstar 
emerged—Chubby Checker. 
h
is recording of “The Twist” launched the first of a series of dance 
crazes that swept the country in the early 1960s. The funkier original version by 
h
ank Ballard and the Midnighters had 
sold extremely well in the r&b market, but there was little crossover into pop. Unlike Ballard, Checker was a pop phe-nomenon, created as an image act in the corporate offices of Cameo/Parkway Records in Philadelphia. At the suggestion of Dick Clark’s wife, Ernest Evans took the name “Chubby Checker,” linguistically paralleling “Fats Domino.” Checker’s “The Twist” reached number one on the pop charts twice (1960 and 1962). In fact, it was the best-selling single of all time well into the 1970s.
Attempting to cash in on the craze the twist had set 
in motion, Cameo/Parkway concocted a seemingly endless series of new dance records, made by both black and white artists: Checker—“The 
h
ucklebuck,” “Pony Time,” “The Fly,” 
and “Limbo Rock”; Bobby Rydell—“The Fish”; The Orlons—“The Wah Watusi”; The Dovells—“Bristol Stomp” and the “
h
ully Gully”; Dee Dee Sharp—“Mashed Potato Time” and 
“Do the Bird.” Sharp was offered “The Loco-Motion” by Gerry Goffin and Carole King, but when her label passed on the song, the writers released a version by their babysitter on the Dimension label. Eva Narcissus Boyd became Little Eva Schlock Rock’s Greatest Hits,  
Volume I
Paul Anka “Diana,” “You Are My Destiny,” “Lonely 
Boy,” “Put Your Head on My Shoulder,” “Puppy 
Love”
Frankie Avalon “Dede Dinah,” “Ginger Bread,” 
 
“Venus,” “Bobby Sox to Stockings”
Annette “Tall Paul,” “O Dio Mio”
Fabian “Turn Me Loose,” “Tiger,” “Hound Dog Man”Bobby Rydell “We Got Love,” “Wild One,” “Swinging 
School”
Connie Francis “Who’s Sorry Now,” “My 
 
Happiness,” “Lipstick on Your Collar,” “Everybody’s 
 
Somebody’s Fool”
Freddy Cannon “Tallahassee Lassie,” “Way Down 
Yonder in New Orleans,” “Palisades Park”
Neil Sedaka “Oh! Carol,” “Stairway to Heaven,” 
“Calendar Girl,” “Happy Birthday Sweet Sixteen,” 
“Breaking Up Is Hard to Do”Gradually, but decisively, strong 
 
regional accents gave way to neutral, 
unlocalized voices. Raucous improvised 
riffs and solos on sax, guitar, or piano 
were overtaken by lavish strings and orchestral arrangements. The sexual double entendre was replaced by a 
highly romanticized vision of teenage 
love and/or angst.
and “The Loco-Motion” became a number 
one hit.
In its historical context, the twist 
craze was socially ambiguous. The dance 
was welcomed enthusiastically into con-servative white suburban America even though its leading exponent was African American. Black Panther leader Eldridge Cleaver would go so far as to call the twist “a guided missile, launched from the ghetto into the very heart of suburbia.”
16 
Certainly, 
it antici -
pated more openly sexual dances like the monkey, the jerk, 
and the Philly dog. For a brief period, it served as an alterna-tive entry into the pop market for African American artists, even as mainstream forces sought to turn back rock ‘n’ roll. In 1962 alone, Sam Cooke’s “Twistin’ the Night Away” and Gary “U.S.” Bonds’ “Dear Lady Twist” and “Twist, Twist Senora” broke into the Top Ten; the Isley Brothers followed their clas-sic “Shout” with “Twist and Shout”; and Atlantic Records reis-sued an album of old Ray Charles material as Do the Twist with 
Ray Charles, which hit number eleven on the album charts. In the long run, however, Cameo/Parkway’s faddish dance crazes tended to reduce rock ‘n’ roll to a novelty. The company also had a close association with American Bandstand, the televised dance party that was primarily responsible for promoting the new teen idols.
Television’s Greatest Hits
Bandstand, as it was called in 1952, was a local Philadelphia 
dance party broadcast on ABC affiliate WFIL-TV . The show’s first host, Bob 
h
orn, was fired after he was arrested for drunk HEAR MORE
Audio links on 
MySearchLab
Schlock Rock’s Greatest Hits,  
Volume II
Bobby Vee “Devil or Angel,” “Rubber Ball,”  
“Take Good Care of My Baby,” “Run to Him,” 
“The Night Has a Thousand Eyes”
Brian Hyland “Itsy Bitsy Teenie Weenie Yellow 
Polkadot Bikini,” “Sealed with a Kiss”
Johnny Tillotson “Poetry in Motion,” “Without 
You,” “It Keeps Right on A-Hurtin’,” “Talk Back 
Trembling Lips”
Bobby Vinton “Roses Are Red,” “Blue on Blue,” 
“Blue Velvet,” “There I’ve Said It Again,”  “My Heart Belongs to Only You,” “Mr. Lonely”
Jay and the Americans “She Cried,” “Only in  
America,” “Come a Little Bit Closer,” “Cara Mia”
Sue Thompson “Norman”
Little Peggy March “I Will Follow Him”Leslie Gore “It’s My Party,” “Judy’s Turn to Cry,” 
“She’s a Fool”
Paul and Paula “Hey Paula”
The biggest African American star to emerge from the 
Philadelphia scene of the late 1950s, Chubby Checker generated contradictory impulses in mainstream culture. 
His version of “The Twist” kicked off a national dance 
craze that the whole family could enjoy even as it antici-pated more openly sexual dances.136  ROCKIN ’ OUTdriving. In 1956, the station asked Dick Clark, a news announcer there since 1952, to take over. 
Although Clark, “the perpetual teenager,” was twenty-seven years old, he looked as young as the teenagers who danced on the show, but carried himself more like a big brother. Under his 
leadership, Bandstand quickly became one of the most important promotional vehicles in the 
music industry. By 1957, the show had been picked up by ABC-TV for national broadcast and 
renamed American Bandstand . As Russell Sanjek has noted, “Within two years, it was being 
broadcast by 101 affiliates to an audience of 20 million. . . . Because of program policy, [the per-formers on Bandstand] were invariably white in the early years.”
17 As a result, “Dick Clark, the 
youthful, debonair host with the Dentyne smile,” was remembered by Arnold Shaw “as the bal-
last to Alan Freed, representing cool, white rock as Freed was the avatar of hot black rock.”18 
Clark has maintained that associating him with only white rock is a cheap shot. “To write that the music we presented was all white bread is a fallacious premise. It’s an easy angle,” he has 
said. “It happens to be wrong.”
19
While it may be true, as Clark pointed out in 1990, “that over two-thirds of the people 
who’ve been initiated into the Rock & Roll 
h
all of Fame had their television debuts on American 
Bandstand,”20 the show’s Philadelphia location undoubtedly placed the local independents in 
a particularly good position to display their wares. Fabian, Frankie Avalon, Bobby Rydell, 
and Freddy Cannon made regular appearances that helped increase their popularity—and 
Clark positioned himself to benefit from such successes. By the end of the decade, he was 
financially involved in thirty-three music-related corporations, including three record com-panies, a management firm, and a pressing plant. 
h
is publishing company held the copy-
right on 162 songs, many of which his show had helped to popularize. Clark’s financial 
entanglements often led him to the borders of ethical practice, as his handling of Duane Eddy illustrates.
Born in Corning, New York, Eddy moved to Phoenix when he was seventeen years old 
to work with producer Lee 
h
azelwood to create the “twangy” guitar sound that became Eddy’s 
signature. From 1958 to 1963, Eddy and his group, the Rebels, charted fifteen Top Forty hits, 
the best known of which are “Rebel Rouser” (1958), “Forty Miles of Bad Road” (1959), and “Because They’re Young” (1960). Between 1958 and 1961, Clark played eleven of Eddy’s hits some 240 times on Bandstand. While Clark has claimed that the show simply followed national 
trends, his promotion unquestionably helped to propel songs to hit status. Throughout this period, Eddy recorded for Clark’s Jaime label, he toured under the auspices of Clark’s manage-ment company, and all of his copyrights were owned by Clark’s publishing company. Given 
this, it is not difficult to imagine how Clark’s private business holdings could have come into conflict with the promotional aspects of American Bandstand.
Of course, television had long been used 
as a promotional vehicle for all kinds of music, including, on occasion, rock ‘n’ roll. Elvis Presley, Chuck Berry, Carl Perkins, Jerry Lee Lewis, Buddy 
h
olly, and Bo Diddley, for example, had 
all appeared, albeit infrequently, on TV variety HEAR MORE
Dick Clark on 
MySearchLab
In rock ‘n’ roll lore, Dick Clark is usually posi-
tioned as counterpoint to Alan Freed, promot-ing white middle-class schlock in opposition to 
Freed’s penchant for black rhythm and blues. 
He is pictured with Fabian, the teen idol often cited as a prime example of this distinction.
 Th E  E MPIRE  S TRIKES  B ACK 137shows. h owever, they did not appear on national  television until 
their musical abilities were proven. In the new pop mentality, visual 
appeal itself became the basis for launching a musical career.
American Bandstand was not the only culprit in this area. Annette Funicello had been 
the Mickey Mouse Club’s most popular mouseketeer since 1955. Connie Stevens, from the tele-
vision series Hawaiian Eye, teamed up with Ed “Kookie” Byrnes, the ultra-cool parking at-
tendant on 77 Sunset Strip who wowed millions of viewers with his hair-combing technique, for a duet titled, naturally, “Kookie, Kookie (Lend Me Your Comb).” The Top Ten single launched short-lived singing careers for both actors. Tommy Sands starred in The Singing Idol, a TV play based loosely on Elvis Presley’s life. Sands’s first hit, “Teen-Age Crush,” came from the telecast.
Of the televised teen idols, one managed to project at least some continuity with his rock-
abilly forebears—the soft-spoken, soft-rocking Ricky Nelson. Starring with his real-life family, 
Nelson played himself on the television sitcom The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet, a show about a so-called normal middle-class suburban family in the 1950s. In 1957, Verve records hit on the idea of recording Nelson singing on the show. 
h
is mediocre cover of Fats Domino’s “I’m 
Walking” broke into the Top Twenty, while the flip side, “ A Teenager’s Romance,” unexpect-edly went to number two. Imperial (Domino’s label) bought Nelson’s contract and began pro-moting him as a respectable alternative to Presley. Over the next seven years, Nelson released twenty-five Top Forty hits, including “Be-Bop Baby” (1957), “Poor Little Fool” (1958), “It’s Late” (1959), and “Travelin’ Man” backed with “
h
ello Mary Lou” (1961), and a few more on 
Decca before he was swamped by the British wave in the mid-1960s.
Nelson’s clean-cut image and popular television series figured heavily in his success, but 
he was not simply a media creation. 
h
is father was a multitalented big band leader in the 1930s 
with nearly forty hit records to his credit; his mother was the band’s vocalist. 
h
is backup band 
included guitarist James Burton, who went on to join Presley, and most of his own early hits were written by Dorsey and/or Johnny Burnette, two over-the-top rockabilly artists. Further-more, he had the capacity to grow as a singer. After his untimely death in 1985, Nelson was eulogized as a country rock singer of some stature. Still, it is impossible to separate his early career from the white middle-class makeover of rock ‘n’ roll.
The Brill Building: The New Tin Pan Alley
Rock ‘n’ roll’s sustained popularity attracted a new breed of professional—songwriters with a 
respect for the Tin Pan Alley tradition who could write (and sometimes sing) in teenage idiom. Paul Anka, a Canadian of Middle Eastern descent, aspired to a career as a professional song-
writer and was convinced he could sing as well. While in Los Angeles, he pitched some tunes 
to Don Costa, a record executive at ABC-Paramount. Costa signed him and produced Anka’s first record, the Latin-inflected “Diana” (1957), written for an older babysitter from his child-hood years. The song became a number one hit single. Further hits followed until the British Invasion in 1964 swept away all the reigning popular styles. Undaunted, Anka segued into the role of adult songwriter, penning “Johnny’s Theme” for the Tonight Show and the lyrics to “My Way” for Sinatra.In the new pop mentality, visual appeal 
itself became the basis for launching a 
musical career.
138  ROCKIN ’ OUTNeil Sedaka was a concert pianist who studied at Julliard. Like Anka, he began his career 
as a professional songwriter, working in collaboration with 
h
oward Greenfield, his high school  
friend. Sedaka and Greenfield displayed a versatility and breadth—ranging from “Stupid 
 
Cupid” and “Frankie” for Connie Francis to “Since You’ve Been Gone” for Clyde McPhatter and 
“I Waited Too Long” for LaVern Baker—that defy easy categorization. 
h
is own singing career 
was defined by trivial, teen-oriented songs. Sedaka and Greenfield, like Anka, turned toward adult pop following the British Invasion, writing for Peggy Lee, Johnny Mathis, and the Fifth Dimension, among others.
Writers like Anka and Sedaka and Greenfield produced plenty of anemic material and 
effortlessly transitioned to adult songwriting. At the same time, they were part of an effort to professionalize rock ‘n’ roll by restoring a Tin Pan Alley approach to popular music, in which writers wrote songs, singers sang them, and artist and repertoire staff brought the two to-
gether. The physical and spiritual center of this new enterprise was the Brill Building at 1619 Broadway, the Manhattan location for a new Tin Pan Alley. In cramped quarters, songwrit-ing teams like Gerry Goffin and Carole King, Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil, Greenfield and Sedaka, Jeff Barry and Ellie Greenwich, and Doc Pomus and Mort Shuman pounded out new  
melodies as their Tin Pan Alley forebears had decades earlier. This latest generation of 
 
composers was to rock ‘n’ roll what Richard Rodgers and Lorenz 
h
art and George and Ira 
Gershwin were to the popular music of an earlier time—although the prevalence of male/female (usually husband and wife) writing teams suggested a level of influence exerted by women songwriters lacking in that earlier era.
Sedaka and Greenfield went to work at Aldon Music, the flagship company of Brill 
Building pop. Like Sedaka and Greenfield, Aldon’s other young writers (including Goffin/
King, Mann/Weil, and even Bobby Darin) displayed consummate skill, real innovation, and 
genuine sensitivity one minute and a truly incredible flair for the in-
sipid the next. It is difficult to believe that the same Goffin and King who wrote “Up on the Roof ” for the Drifters and “Natural Woman” for Aretha Franklin also wrote “
h
er Royal Majesty” for James 
 
Darren. 
h
ow could Mann/Weil have turned out both “You’ve Lost 
That Lovin’ Feeling” for the Righteous Brothers and “Blame It on 
the Bossa Nova” for Edie Gorme? In short, the Brill Building writers produced some of best rock ‘n’ roll of the era as well as some of the worst schlock imaginable (as we shall see in more detail in Chapter 6).
The War on Rock ‘n’ Roll
Throughout the 1950s, American society was beset by widespread anxieties concerning youth 
and juvenile delinquency prompted by the rising cultural influence of teenagers in the midst of the baby boom. Political and religious leaders at times targeted comic books and movies for 
their purportedly detrimental influence.
21 By mid-decade, though, rock ‘n’ roll had become the 
focal point for society’s fears of miscegenation, sexuality, violence, juvenile delinquency, and 
general moral decline. In the eyes of many, a paramount danger was that this music was no 
Aldon’s other young writers (includ-
ing Goffin/King, Mann/Weil, and even 
Bobby Darin) displayed consummate 
skill, real innovation, and genuine sensi-
tivity one minute and a truly incredible flair for the insipid the next.
 Th E  E MPIRE  S TRIKES  B ACK 139longer contained on “the other side of the tracks.” Rock ‘n’ roll’s biggest sin was to bring styles 
of music once considered class-and race-specific into the mainstream and, in so doing, to rede -
fine our conception of popular music.
The opening salvo of organized opposition began in late 1954, even before the term rock 
‘n’ roll had come into widespread usage. Opining that the sexual double entendres entering 
the mainstream primarily through r&b crossovers were in poor taste, entertainment trade pa-pers—most notably, a three-part series in V ariety on what it termed “leer-ics”— called on the 
industry to police itself lest other forces do it for them. These articles generated a considerable public response. Fearing reprisals, record companies and radio stations—including prominent black-oriented outlets like WDIA in Memphis—announced campaigns to weed out suggestive lyrics. Catholic youth organizations in Boston, Chicago, and Minneapolis and fundamentalist religious groups all over the South supplied lists of objectionable records. As one might expect, 
such songs as “Sixty Minute Man” and “Work with Me Annie” made all the lists, but even the Everly Brothers’ “Wake Up Little Susie” managed to get banned in Boston. Municipalities set up review boards to screen new releases. When all else failed, police confiscated offensive re-cords and jukeboxes.
Finding their offensive against “smutty” lyrics ineffective, opponents changed their tac-
tics. After 1955, according to Linda Martin and Kerry Segrave,
the anti-rock advocates moved into broader attacks on the music. Attacking with just a sexual 
brush could only “tar” a few songs. By moving into wider areas of attack the opposition hoped to tar the full spectrum of rock ‘n’ roll. Henceforth attacks would center more on the poor and abys-mal quality of rock music, its supposed effect in creating juvenile delinquency, and the lewdness of performers themselves.
22
The industry was not of one mind on these matters. “ American pop music today, despite the 
attacks upon it, is in its most vital period,” editorialized the outspoken Paul Ackerman in 
 Billboard. “It most broadly reflects the diverse elements making up musical America. It is rich 
and fresh in sound and content.”
23 Still, attacks on rock ‘n’ roll encouraged more official inter-
ventions, which took the form of a loosely coordinated series of government investigations and 
legislative actions culminating in the infamous “payola hearings” of 1959 and 1960.
As noted in Chapter 1, payola—the practice of “paying for play,” that is, offering financial, 
sexual, or other personal inducements in return for promotion—was hardly a newcomer to the 
music business. Song plugging, as the practice was called earlier in the century, had been the lynchpin of industry marketing since the heyday of Tin Pan Alley. As early as World War I, it was estimated that about $400,000 per year was paid to singers for the express purpose of pushing certain songs. Indeed, similar practices have characterized the development of most industries in their formative stages. In the 1950s, however, the focus on payola in the music industry became the operative strategy for neutralizing rock ‘n’ roll.
Rock ‘n’ roll engendered changes in the way popular music was produced and dissemi-
nated and that had made the music difficult to contain. Mainstream pop had been produced by 
the major record companies according to a fairly precise division of labor and with fairly clear lines of power and authority. In contrast, rock ‘n’ roll’s low-cost, independent, and often disor-ganized production and distribution—in part the result of technological advances—precipitated 140  ROCKIN ’ OUTshifts that tended to democratize and decentralize the production of popular music. A Billboard 
study comparing production in 1939 and 1959 showed that in 1939 three New York–based companies were responsible for the Top Ten songs; by 1959 thirty-nine companies, scattered 
among ten different states, contributed to the Top Ten. The study thus reached an inescapable 
conclusion: “music business had broken out of Broadway, and Tin Pan Alley was gone as a shaper of trends and styles.”
24
Although the established industry powers wanted to eliminate 
rock ‘n’ roll, they were never sure, given the anarchy of its produc-
tion, where or how to intervene. Acting in concert, if not conspiracy, 
ASCAP and some of its most notable publishers, the major record 
companies and some of their biggest stars, and the U.S. government and some of its most tiresome elected officials waged a protracted public battle for a return to “good music.” Because most rock ‘n’ roll material was written by Broadcast Music Incorporated (BMI) writers, 
ASCAP happily joined in the attack. For ASCAP , the offensive against rock ‘n’ roll was simply an escalation of its efforts since 1939 to put BMI out of business. For the major labels, the fight was an attempt to halt the market expansion of the independents. To conservative elected of -
ficials, jumping on the bandwagon with the likes of Frank Sinatra, Bing Crosby, Steve Allen, 
Ira Gershwin, and Oscar 
h
ammerstein to hold back the floodgates of social change may have 
seemed like a sure way of grabbing some quick and memorable headlines. Beneath all the high-toned rhetoric, then, lay a massive accumulation of ignorance and racism and a fair amount of unabashed economic and political self-interest.
ASCAP—in effect, the organizational agent of Tin Pan Alley—led the charge. In 1953, 
thirty-three ASCAP members filed a $150 million antitrust suit against BMI, charging it with a conspiracy to dominate the market by keeping ASCAP music off the radio. Sydney M. Kaye, chair of BMI, pointed out that none of the radio stations that owned stock in BMI had ever received a dividend and that “all broadcasters have so-called blanket licenses from both ASCAP and BMI. . . . They cannot save one penny if they play more BMI and less ASCAP music. Broadcasters have, therefore, no incentive to discriminate against ASCAP music.”
25 Stanley 
 
Adams, president of ASCAP , could not identify a single station or network that had discriminated 
against ASCAP . Still, ASCAP continued to attack.
In 1956, under pressure from the Songwriters of America, a group of some 700 ASCAP 
writers, the Antitrust Subcommittee of the 
h
ouse Judiciary Committee, chaired by Congress-
man Emanuel Celler, initiated a probe into BMI. Officially, the committee was to investigate 
whether the relationship between BMI and radio had any influence on the music that was aired. 
h
owever, Congressman Celler made clear the racial undertones of the investigation when he 
said: “Well, rock and roll has its place. There is no question about it. It’s given great impetus to talent, particularly among the colored people. It’s a natural expression of their emotions and feelings.”
26 The committee heard testimony from a parade of influential ASCAP writ-
ers but could find no evidence of wrongdoing by BMI and referred the matter to the Justice 
Department.
The next battle occurred in 1958. ASCAP had a Senate bill introduced to prevent broad-
casters from owning BMI stock. To gather support for the bill, no less a figure than Frank Acting in concert, if not conspiracy, 
ASCAP and some of its most notable 
publishers, the major record companies 
and some of their biggest stars, and 
the U.S. government and some of its most tiresome elected officials waged a protracted public battle for a return to 
“good music.”
 Th E  E MPIRE  S TRIKES  B ACK 141Sinatra wrote a vicious piece of testimony in which he asserted his distaste for rock ‘n’ roll in 
no uncertain terms. Sinatra called the music “the most brutal, ugly, degenerate, vicious form of expression it has been my misfortune to hear,” blamed it for fostering destructive reactions 
in young people, accused it of phoniness, and called those who created it “cretinous goons” 
who played on the “lewd” appeal of their product.
27 Joining Sinatra was a chorus of ASCAP 
sympathizers. The Songwriters Protective Association, made up of ASCAP members, testified 
before the Communications Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Interstate and Foreign 
 
Commerce, charged with gathering information relevant to the bill. Social critic Vance Packard, 
appearing as a paid witness, declared that rock ‘n’ roll “was inspired by what had been called race music modified to stir the animal instinct in modern teenagers.”
28 Even with 1,200 pages 
of such testimony, however, the bill died in committee.
In 1959, rock ‘n’ roll’s opponents came closer to hitting its nerve center when ASCAP 
convinced the Legislative Oversight Subcommittee of the 
h
ouse Committee on Interstate and 
Foreign Commerce to launch a new probe into payola. Rock ‘n’ roll’s opponents reasoned cor-rectly that curtailing the freedom of (largely unregulated) deejays could go a long way toward stopping the flow of rock ‘n’ roll music. While the committee, chaired by Arkansas Democrat Oren 
h
arris, was to investigate abuses at all levels of the recording industry, deejays became 
the main targets of its hearings.
Ignoring all previous evidence of the music’s popularity, the payola hearings proceeded 
on the assumption that no deejay would play music as inferior and tasteless as rock ‘n’ roll un-less he was handsomely rewarded for it. The most damning indictment in the payola hearings 
was that against Alan Freed. While other deejays also fell victim to the probe, Freed was the most visible symbol of everything that many found threatening about the music and therefore the most obvious target. 
h
e had played a major role in popularizing r&b among white teenag-
ers and had continued to push original black recordings during the cover-record period. 
h
e 
had also refused to sign a statement saying that he had never received money or gifts to pro-mote records. Freed had run afoul of the law when a concert he staged in 1952 at the Cleveland Arena was oversold and had to be canceled. Although he was charged with fraud (charges were eventually dropped), the real issue had been that the crowd was racially integrated at a time when Cleveland was a segregated city.
In Boston in 1958, a concert Freed staged at the Boston Arena degenerated into violence 
outside the building. This time he was indicted on two charges of inciting a riot. One week 
after the concert, he was no longer a WINS deejay. 
h
e moved to a slot at WABC radio and  
also began hosting a dance party on WNEW-TV . In November 1959, after one of his 
 
Boston 
indictments had been dropped and he had pleaded no contest to the other, he was fired from 
WABC—a move that Freed biographer John Jackson says “precipitated a nationwide disc jockey purge.”
29 Two days later, he lost his job at WNEW as well. By the time the payola 
hearings really took off, Freed’s career was already on the ropes. In 1960, he was arrested for 
accepting $30,000 in payola and two years later was fined and given a suspended sentence. 
Unemployed and penniless, he was indicted again in 1964 for income tax evasion. 
h
e died of 
uremia the following year, a broken man.
Dick Clark, in contrast, came through the hearings with his reputation intact, if not 
strengthened. Clark represented a respectability that Freed did not. 
h
e was also toting up 142  ROCKIN ’ OUTsome $12 million in annual billings for ABC, compared to Freed’s $250,000. As a result, ABC-
TV issued a statement in support of Clark even after its radio division had fired Freed. 
h
aving 
voluntarily divested himself of the companies most likely to show conflicts of interest, Clark 
was pronounced “a fine young man” by chair Oren 
h
arris.
When all was said and done, the committee had identified a pal-
try $263,245 in payola to deejays, but with no hard evidence to sup -
port even this figure. Still, the number of deejays who felt compelled 
to come forward, confess their sins, and name others was reminiscent of the worst aspects of the McCarthy era witch hunts. Reams of such 
public testimony and extensive media coverage helped to create a climate that encouraged the pop-oriented makeover of “down and dirty” rock ‘n’ roll. Of course, by this time, many of the most prominent rock ‘n’ roll pioneers had already been neutralized in one way or another. 
Presley had been drafted in early 1958; by the time he came home from Germany in 1960, his influence in shaping the genre had ended. Little Richard had quit rock ‘n’ roll in the late fifties to join the ministry. Jerry Lee Lewis’s career had self-destructed in 1958 when he married his thirteen-year-old cousin. Buddy 
h
olly had died in a plane crash, which also took the lives of 
Ritchie Valens and the Big Bopper, in 1959—the same year the committee began its hearings. Later that year, Chuck Berry’s arrest for a violation of the Mann Act effectively removed him as a hit-maker on the rock ‘n’ roll scene.
In the end, a bill passed that outlawed payola. Its most immediate effect was to impose 
on radio a tighter, more hierarchical structure that rendered popular music easier to control.
30 
Thus, in effect, radio was caught between a rock and a hard place. Severely chastised by the 
committee, which had delivered its racial message in no uncertain terms, and fearful of Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC) reprisals that could affect licensing, rock-oriented radio 
became skittish about programming too many black artists. 
h
owever, listeners still demanded 
the music, so these stations could not afford to ignore it completely. In general, they responded by playing as few black artists as they could without losing their listenership.
Surf’s Up!
In the early 1960s, as the second generation of schlock rockers pitted their uneven talents 
against the phenomenon of the girl groups and the emergence of Motown (see Chapter 6), surf music emerged with vocal and instrumental variants. Its trajectory was remarkably short, es-
sentially rising and falling from 1962 to 1964.
While surf music was part of the continuing trend that made rock ‘n’ roll both white 
and middle class, it was also a more complex phenomenon. In the early 1960s, surfing be-
came the central metaphor for an easygoing lifestyle based on the unabashed celebration of consumption. Nowhere was the image of white, middle-class America more on display than in surf music, which also marked the rise of Southern California and the West Coast more generally as defining locations in the era’s youth culture.
31 Its themes dealt primarily with 
affluence—fast cars, attractive women and men at leisure on the beach, and, of course, the 
sport itself. Still, unlike schlock, which offered rock ‘n’ roll little more than a backward look 
Still, the number of deejays who felt 
compelled to come forward, confess 
their sins, and name others was reminis-
cent of the worst aspects of the McCarthy 
era witch hunts.
 Th E  E MPIRE  S TRIKES  B ACK 143to pop song stylists of an earlier era, surf music provided something of a gateway to the 
1960s. It offered a vibrant, driving sound worthy of the name rock ‘n’ roll . As Chapple and 
Garofalo have argued elsewhere, surf music did not “soften” rock ‘n’ roll; rather, it was an 
important precursor to the psychedelic and “underground” styles that would evolve later 
in the decade. Many of surf music’s architects, such as the Beach Boys and producer Lou Adler—who worked with Jan and Dean—would exert a lingering influence on the decade’s music. Surf music was as credible as any earlier forms of rock ‘n’ roll but it differed from those previous styles in one critical respect: “[I]t was made by middle-class whites. ”
32
Surf music should not be confused with the drivel that is-
sued from 
h
ollywood “beach party” movies, beginning in 1959 
withGidget (Sandra Dee and James Darren) and culminating in 
1963 with Beach Party (Annette Funicello and Frankie Ava-
lon). They transformed the Southern California surf cult into a national fad, but they 
 
trivialized the sport with their focus on bikinis and middle-class teen dilemmas. They do represent, however, one instance in which 
h
ollywood beat the record companies to the 
punch.
The prototypical surf music group was Dick Dale and the Del-tones from Southern 
California. Working closely with pioneering electric guitar manufacturer Leo Fender, Dale helped to develop the amplification and reverberation equipment that gave much of surf music its distinctive sound. 
h
e and his group were a powerhouse live combo with a dedi-
cated following that had a local hit with “Let’s Go Trippin’” in 1961. On the strength of the 
group’s live shows Capitol signed them in 1963, but the group failed to deliver any hits. By this time, their strong bass lines, sax-based instrumentals, and Dale’s harsh vocal style—indeed, the very name of the band—seemed almost anachronistic in the national market. It would be left to other groups, primarily from Southern California, to establish the style nationally.
A number of these groups were instrumental ensembles. First out of the gate were the 
Marketts, who released “Surfer’s Stomp” in 1962. That same year a British group, the Tornadoes, effected a surf sound on “Telstar,” a number one hit. Instrumental surf peaked in 1963 with the release of “Pipeline” by the Chantays, “Wipe Out” by the Surfaris, and “The Lonely Surfer” by session musician Jack Nitzsche. The Pyramids scored with “Penetration” in 1964 and, by 
this time, other groups from across the country, such as the Astronauts from Denver and the 
Trashmen from Minnesota (“Surfin’ Bird,” 1964) had found their way into the pop market through the surf tag. But 1964 was really the swan song for surf as the British Invasion effec-tively washed away the entire genre.
In its short life, instrumental surf music was part of a venerable tradition of instru-
mental rock ‘n’ roll that began with talented musicians like organist Bill Doggett (“
h
onky 
Tonk,” 1956); alto sax player Bill Justis (“Raunchy,” 1957); and Bill Black, Elvis Presley’s original bass player, who recorded eight Top Thirty instrumental hits with his own combo. Initially, instrumental rock ‘n’ roll drew on a wide range of sources. The Champs’ “Tequila” echoed the Chicano rhythms of the Southwest. Jazz drummer Cozy Cole broke into the rock ‘n’ roll market in 1958 with “Topsy Part II”—a Basie tune from the late 1930s—followed by HEAR MORE
Dick Dale on 
MySearchLabSurf music should not be confused 
with the drivel that issued from Holly-
wood “beach party” movies, beginning 
in 1959 with Gidget and culminating in 
1963 with Beach Party.
144  ROCKIN ’ OUT“Topsy Part I” and “Turvy Part II” in 1958. In 1959, Santo and Johnny Farina had a number 
one hit with “Sleep Walk,” featuring a lilting 
h
awaiian steel guitar. In 1960, the Viscounts 
resurrected the jazz classic “
h
arlem Nocturne” with enough tremolo and echo to qualify it 
as pure rock ‘n’ roll.
Instrumental rock ‘n’ roll had its greatest successes, however, as novelty music. In 1959, 
Johnny and the 
h
urricanes hit number five with “Red River Rock,” a rock ‘n’ roll version of the 
traditional “Red River Valley.” It was followed quickly by “Reveille Rock” (1959), an adapta-
tion of the Army bugle call, and “Beatnik Fly” (1960), a remake of Burl Ives’s “Blue Tail Fly.” Kokomo pillaged a Grieg piano concerto to turn “ Asia Minor” into a Top Ten rock ‘n’ roll hit in 1961. That same year, B. Bumble and the Stingers turned “The Flight of the Bumble Bee” into a boogie-woogie piano hit called “Bumble Boogie.” The group followed up in 1962 with “Nut Rocker,” a rock ‘n’ roll version of the march from Tchaikovsky’s Nutcracker. The subtlety 
and polish of Cozy Cole gave way to the novelty drumming of Sandy Nelson, whose adolescent pounding on “Teen Beat” (1959) and “Let There Be Drums” (1961) anticipated the classic surf drum solo that appeared on “Wipe Out” two years later.
Two groups dominated the guitar-based sound that eventually came to define instru-
mental rock ‘n’ roll—Duane Eddy and the Rebels, and the Ventures. Eddy and the Rebels were  
the most successful, but the Ventures were the most influential. The Ventures, the pride of 
 
Seattle, established the instrumentation of the classic rock ‘n’ roll quartet—electric lead, 
rhythm, and bass guitars, and drums—no horns, no keyboards; just electricity and rhythm. On their debut single, “Walk—Don’t Run” (1960), the group evidenced polish, technical precision, and versatility without sacrificing excitement and drive. Overall, they enjoyed a longevity rare for an instrumental group, recording more than fifty albums, sixteen of which made the Top 
Forty. As rock writer Greg Shaw has noted, however, “[s]urf music was the last hurrah for 
instrumental rock as a popular genre; after the British Invasion of 1964, vocals again assumed primacy in white rock.”
33 By then, surf itself had become a vocally dominant music, with hits 
such as the 
h
ondells “Little 
h
onda,” Ronny & the Daytonas’ “G.T.O.,” and the Rip Chords’ 
“
h
ey Little Cobra.”
The Beach Boys became the definitive surf group. The group was a family affair. In 
the early 1960s, brothers Brian (keyboards, bass), Carl (guitar), and Dennis Wilson (drums) 
teamed up with their cousin Mike Love (lead vocals) and their 
h
awthorne, California, neigh-
bor Al Jardine (guitar, bass) to form the most popular self-contained vocal/instrumental combo in town. Dennis, the only surfer in the group, convinced Brian and Mike to write songs that elevated the sport to a metaphor for the American Dream. Their images, like surf music in general, were bound to a kind of affluence available only to a narrow segment of the population. Seemingly oblivious to 
their own privilege or the social currents around them, such as the growing civil rights 
movement, the Beach Boys were hardly apologetic for their music. “We’re white and we sing white,” the group said.
34 Despite this comment, they copped (with attribution) the tune for 
“Surfin’ U.S.A.,” their first Top Ten single, from Chuck Berry’s “Sweet Little Sixteen.” In 
many ways, it was fitting that the group should “collaborate” with Berry. Barring the subur-
ban focus and a West Coast orientation, the Beach Boys constructed teen anthems in much The Beach Boys constructed teen 
anthems in much the same way that 
Chuck Berry did. Their sophisticated 
close harmonies and elegant counter-
point created a sound that was unique among white U.S. rock groups.
 Th E  E MPIRE  S TRIKES  B ACK 145
The Beach Boys’ music is distinguished from the many “surf and sun” 
bands of the 1960s by the innovative production skills of leader/song-
writer Brian Wilson. His methods of complex, multi-sectioned musical struc-
tures (“Good Vibrations”), multiple layers of overdubbed vocal harmonies, 
and sophisticated production techniques were emulated by many of the Beach Boys’ contemporaries. The Beatles have often cited the influence of the Beach Boys’ Pet Sounds LP on Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band. 
“Surfin’ U.S.A.” is notable for having been included in the Rock and Roll 
Hall of Fame’s list of 50 Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll.
Musical Style Notes
The musical style of “Surfin’ U.S.A.” has three major elements: the influence of Chuck Berry, the musical conventions of 
“surf” music, and the Beach Boys’ signature multiple vocal harmonies.
● The opening guitar riff, the chord progressions, and the refrain all borrow heavily from Chuck Berry’s song “Sweet Little Sixteen”—so heavily, in fact, that Brian Wilson had to give Berry a songwriting credit on the LP in order to avoid a lawsuit.
● The “surf music” influence, which is obvious in the lyrics, can be heard in the instru-mentation: through the high, treble-dominated, and reverb-heavy guitar tone reminis-cent of surf music king Dick Dale, and the relentless, pounding, quarter-note pulse of 
the bass drum (meaning one drum hit per beat).
● On the refrain “Everybody’s gone surfin’,” we hear the Beach Boys’ impeccable multiple 
vocal harmonies, with their wide range (from bass to falsetto). This refrain is a good ex-ample of a skill shared by both Brian Wilson and Chuck Berry: the ability to write a musi-
cal “hook,” one of those phrases that gets stuck in your brain for the rest of the day.
Musical “Road Map”
TIMINGS COMMENTS
0:00–0:02 Introduction—electric guitar riff, borrowed directly from Chuck Berry.
0:02–0:25 Verse 1
Note the vocal background harmony parts, singing on “oo” syllable.
0:25–0:49
0:44Verse 2Vocal harmony parts acquire their own lyrics: “Inside, outside, USA.”Harmony parts join refrain: “Everybody’s gone surfin’. . . .”
0:50–1:131:13Verse 3Vocal background harmony parts, singing again on “oo” syllable.Typical surf-style drum “kick” into fourth verse.
1:14–1:37
1:32Verse 4Vocal harmony parts repeat lyrics from verse 2: “Inside, outside, USA.”Harmony parts join refrain: “Everybody’s gone surfin’. . . .”
1:38–1:51 Keyboard (organ) solo and guitar solo over form of the verse.Guitar comes in.
1:57–2:26 Harmony parts join refrain: “Everybody’s gone surfin’. . . .”Refrain repeats five times (fades during fifth repeat).
Listening Guide 11“Surfin’ U.S.A.”
Artist: The Beach Boys
Music/Lyrics by Brian Wilson and 
Chuck Berry
Label: Capitol (1963)146  ROCKIN ’ OUTthe same way that Chuck Berry did. 
Their sophisticated close harmonies and elegant counterpoint created a 
sound that was unique among white 
U.S. rock groups.
The Beach Boys came to na-
tional attention in 1962 when their first release, “Surfin’,” reached num-ber seventy-five on the national pop 
charts. Signed to Capitol that year, the group hit number fourteen with “Surfin’ Safari.” Their biggest year was 1963, which was also the peak of the surfing fad. “Surfin’ U.S.A.”/“Shut Down,” “Surfer Girl”/”Little Deuce Coupe,” and “Be True to Your School”/“In My Room” all 
hit the charts between April and November. By 1964, the group’s boldly conceived ideology of “Fun, Fun, Fun” was well established. Lurking beneath the good-time gloss, however, was a group capable of expressing doubt (“When I Grow Up [To Be a Man]”) and even insecurity (“Don’t Worry Baby”), and they invested even the most tired clichés with a certain freshness and vitality. Although the group’s songs were never quite cynical, they managed to convey the sense that propping up false myths was a task that could not be taken too seriously. In this spirit, they delivered all the raunchiness of a high-school garage band but still managed to sound as squeaky clean as the Philadelphia crowd. The job of managing these contradic -
tions—transforming them into hits—fell mostly to Brian Wilson, a largely self-taught musi-cal genius and an increasingly tortured soul.
Brian had emerged as the group’s main writer, arranger, and producer (a rarity at ma-
jor labels) following the extraordinary success of the group’s second album, Surfin’ U.S.A. 
h
e became determined to perfect the oceanic version of his idol Phil Spector’s “wall of 
sound”  (see Chapter 6) based on the Beach Boys’ harmonic virtuosity. Starting with the 
complicated arrangement and unorthodox harmonies on “I Get Around” (1964), Brian 
 
began to push the limits of pop convention. By the time the style was fully developed on “California Girls” (1965), he had also begun testing the limits of his own consciousness with mind-altering drugs. The Beach Boys’ Pet Sounds  LP (1966) experimented with 
 
advanced 
studio techniques well before the Beatles’ Sgt. Pepper album. Its reputation has only grown The Beach Boys made no bones about 
infusing rock ‘n’ roll with white middle-class themes and images. They man-
aged to merge the squeaky cleanliness 
of Philadelphia schlock with the un-bridled energy of a high-school garage band.
 Th E  E MPIRE  S TRIKES  B ACK 147in the years since its release, and in 2009 Rolling Stone selected it as the second best album 
of all time, claiming,
With its vivid orchestration, lyrical ambition, elegant pacing and thematic coherence, Pet Sounds 
invented—and in some sense perfected—the idea that an album could be more than the sum of its parts. When Wilson sang, “Wouldn’t it be nice if we were older?” on the magnificent opener, he wasn’t just imagining a love that could evolve past high school; he was suggesting a new grown-
up identity for rock & roll music itself.
35
After the success of the fully “psychedelic” million-seller “Good Vibrations” in 1966, 
Brian embarked on what was supposed to be his crowning achievement—a concept LP ten-
tatively titled Smile. A short time into the project, however, his behavior became erratic. After 
he allegedly destroyed many of the album’s vocal tracks in a fit of paranoia, the project became 
 
irrevocably stalled. The release of Sgt. Pepper was the final blow. Brian suffered a complete 
breakdown and withdrew from the group. The remaining members released a hastily assem-bled substitute LP , Smiley Smile, which included some fine cuts but failed to reach the Top Forty. Although the group continued to produce hits, it never regained the magic of Brian’s peak years. Only in 2011 was a reconstructed and expanded box set version of the original Smile recording sessions issued, earning rave reviews as the unearthing of a lost classic.
The only other act that came within striking distance of the surf crown was Jan and 
Dean. Jan Berry, Dean Torrence, and Arnie Ginsburg (not to be confused with the deejay of 
the same name) had been active since 1959, when “Jennie Lee”—released as “Jan and Arnie” because Dean was in the army at the time—became a Top Ten hit. A year later, Jan and Dean, no longer with Arnie, scored another Top Ten hit, “Baby Talk.” In 1963, “Surf City,” written by Jan and Brian Wilson, went to number one, establishing Jan and Dean as a surf act. The two rode that marketing label to chart success with “Drag City” (1963) and “Dead Man’s Curve” and “The Little Old Lady (From Pasadena)” (1964), among others. In 1966, Jan hit a parked vehicle at 65 miles per hour, killing three passengers and sustaining brain damage. The trag -
edy effectively ended the career of Jan and Dean, but only after the genre itself had already self-destructed.
Because it opened a new chapter in the social relations of class, age, and race (but not gender), 
rock ‘n’ roll became a target of attack by those who feared the changes the music signaled. Be-hind every attack—from cover records to government investigations—was an attempt to reclaim mainstream cultural space for white middle-class values, themes, and images. This attempt was at least in part successful as the characteristics that had defined rock ‘n’ roll in the first place—strong regional accents, hot instrumental solos, and suggestive lyrics—gradually fell by the way-side. In all these changes, the connections between rock ‘n’ roll and its r&b heritage became more strained, which separated two genres that had been nearly indistinguishable.
Prior to 1959, rock ‘n’ roll had effected an extraordinary degree of overlap between the 
pop charts and the r&b charts. Not only had black artists gained unprecedented access to the 148  ROCKIN ’ OUTpopular market through rock ‘n’ roll, but white artists had sold to the black record-buying public 
in unprecedented numbers. In 1958, for example, more than half the records to make the r&b Top Ten were by white artists.
36 From 1959 on, however, bland white vocalists like Fabian, 
Frankie Avalon, and Bobby Rydell were marketed as rock ‘n’ rollers. Although they achieved considerable success as such, their styles were inappropriate for r&b radio and, as a result, white 
artists’ penetration of the r&b market declined sharply. Somewhat paradoxically, the separation 
of rock ‘n’ roll and r&b contributed to a resurgence of rhythm and blues as a separate style with crossover potential. After 1959, artists like Wilbert Harrison (“Kansas City”), Barrett Strong (“Money”), Jimmy Jones (“Handy Man,” “Good Timin’”), the Shirelles (“Will You Love Me Tomorrow,” “Dedicated to the One I Love”), Gary “U.S.” Bonds (“New Orleans,” “Quarter to Three,” “School Is Out”), the Crystals (“He’s a Rebel”), Gene Chandler (“Duke of Earl”), and the Marvelettes (“Please Mr. Postman”) provided a welcome change of pace (and race) in the popular market.
The percentage of black artists crossing over into the popular market remained uncom-
monly high until the onslaught of British performers in 1964. Seen in this light, not even the 
Beatles—the very musicians who breathed new life into the music—can be considered apart from the racist patterns that shaped rock ‘n’ roll. In fact, it is impossible to understand the magnitude and immediacy of their acceptance in this country without some reference to the theme of race. At the same time, it would be a gross distortion of history to underplay their unique contribution to the music and the culture of the 1960s. The Beatles were refreshing and talented, and they were 
the harbingers of broad cultural and political change.
LEARN MORE
Chapter Test on 
MySearchLab  149
6
The conservative hegemony and control that rock ‘n’ roll  
challenged implicitly in the 1950s gave way to open social and political 
upheaval in the 1960s. Just as the Beatles marked the decade musically, a 
myriad of grassroots social and political movements—civil rights, anti-
war, black power, student power, the counterculture, and later women’s liberation, among other movements—signified a dramatic shift in the 
political center of gravity toward the left. These changes arose from contradictions that had been bubbling just beneath the surface of American life for quite some time.
In the 1950s, it was expected that each generation of Americans would be heir to a higher 
standard of living than the generation before it. However, significant paradoxes coexisted in this picture. First and perhaps foremost was the “race problem,” brought into bold relief by the historic U.S. Supreme Court school desegregation decision of 1954, Brown v. Board of Education . 
Second, while Madison Avenue encouraged disciplined workers to become hedonistic consumers, 
an almost Victorian attitude toward sexuality still existed throughout the country. In some ways, rock ‘n’ roll represented an initial (and partial) response to this contradiction. Finally, even as the country had entered a period of unprecedented affluence, some segments of the population still experienced widespread poverty nationwide.
The Soviet Union launched Sputnik, the first orbiting space satellite, in 1957, forcing 
Americans to question U.S. superiority in everything from national defense to scientific re-search. An educated workforce was seized upon as the key to continued U.S. dominance, and a tremendous nationwide expansion of the university system ensued. Higher education, once the province of the economic and intellectual elite, became available on a mass scale.
Thus, as the 1960s dawned, the United States was in the process of reinventing itself. 
The search for a new image led to the election of one of the youngest presidents in U.S. history, John F . Kennedy. He assembled “the best and the brightest” to address the country’s problems 
HEAR MORE
Learning Objectives 
on MySearchLabPopular Music and 
Political Culture:  The Sixties150  ro CKI n’ o UTand asked Americans to give unselfishly of themselves in the restructuring of American values. 
The momentum of his vision; the political acumen of Lyndon Johnson, his vice president and then successor; and the organized moral and political force of the civil rights movement yielded 
landmark legislation and social programs. In this context, young men and women of all classes, 
races, and ethnic backgrounds entered college in record numbers. The participation of these young people—indeed, their leadership—in rethinking America produced the movements and the tumultuousness that defined the 1960s.
The Civil Rights Movement and Popular Music
The link between the civil rights movement (the movement from which all other movements 
took their cue) and music was first forged through early union songs and spirituals, such as 
“Which Side Are You 
o
n,” “This Little Light of Mine,” “Keep Your 
Eyes on the Prize,” “This Land Is Your Land,” “Down by the 
r
iver-
side,” and, of course, “We Shall 
o
vercome.” In the words of Bernice 
Johnson 
r
eagon, these were the “songs that moved the movement.”1 
Given that rock ‘n’ roll crossed the lines of class, race, and age, it is ironic, in retrospect, that civil rights activists tended to avoid the mu-
sic initially because its commercial bent seemed antithetical to the 
goals of the struggle.
2 Still, while civil rights activists may have avoided rock ‘n’ roll, one can 
analyze the movement’s influence on the national consciousness by charting the trajectory of 
popular music during this period.
Consider, for example, the mid-1950s. An activist Southern black clergy, led by the 
 r
everend Martin Luther King, Jr., began to ally with secular organizations such as the 
 n
ational 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (
n
AACP), the Congress on 
r
acial Equality 
(C
or
E), and later the Student 
n
on-Violent Coordinating Committee (S
n
CC). At the same 
time, as 
n
elson George has noted, “The music world was witnessing the breaking of a long-
standing taboo, as gospel began to fuse with rhythm and blues.”3 Thus, in popular music, as in 
the struggle for civil rights, the black church became a force to be reckoned with. As regional civil rights struggles, erupting primarily in the South, came to national attention, early rock ‘n’ 
roll, based on Southern rhythm and blues (r&b) styles, found a national audience. In Montgomery, 
Alabama, in 1955, 
r
osa Parks’s defiance struck a blow for racial equality at the same time that 
Fats Domino, Little 
r
ichard, and Chuck Berry began to conquer the mainstream market as 
rock ‘n’ roll heroes. The rebellious tone of early rock ‘n’ roll mirrored the growing demand for political change in the black community.
The strategy of the early civil rights movement was integrationist; even at its most 
militant—the lunch-counter sit-ins of 1960 and the freedom rides of 1961—the demand was for social equality. Issues like institutionalized racism, white skin privilege, and black self-determination were not yet prominent on the political agenda. Paralleling this integrationist 
ideal, Chuck Berry chronicled a typical “School Day” in 1957 without mentioning race—even as President Eisenhower sent federal troops to Little 
r
ock, Arkansas, to enforce the Supreme 
Court’s school desegregation edict. While the Little 
r
ock episode provoked veteran jazz star 
Given that rock ‘n’ roll crossed the 
lines of class, race, and age, it is ironic, 
in retrospect, that civil rights activists 
tended to avoid the music initially  
because its commercial bent seemed antithetical to the goals of the struggle.
 Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 151Louis Armstrong to denounce Eisenhower as a “two faced” man with “no guts,” black rock-
ers like Berry avoided—and were rarely asked to provide—direct criticism of national policies on race.
4 As Berry would later state, “I said: ‘Why can’t I do as Pat Boone does and play good 
music for the white people and sell as well there as I could in the neighborhood? And that’s what I shot for writing ‘School Day.’”
5 During this period, then, the influence of the civil rights 
movement on rock ‘n’ rollers was not apparent in their lyrics or public statements but in the ascendancy of black producers and black-owned record labels and in the appearance of black fe-
male vocal groups. There can be no question that the growing civil rights movement provided 
a climate that encouraged these developments.
Girl Groups, Male Producers, and Brill Building Pop
In the early 1960s, as civil rights activity heated up, r&b moved uptown, to use the term Charlie 
Gillett coined to describe the new, more polished, distinctly urban production style. Uptown r&b had been prefigured in Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller’s pioneering work with the Drifters 
(“There Goes My Baby,” “Dance with Me,” “This Magic Moment,” “Save the Last Dance for 
Me”) in 1959 and 1960, and its crossover potential was immediately apparent. Using elaborate instrumentation, lavish studio production and advanced recording techniques, the next gen-eration of independent r&b producers (Luther Dixon, Phil Spector, Berry Gordy) delivered the forcefulness and emotional impact of rhythm and blues to the mainstream market. In the process, they rekindled the spirit of early rock ‘n’ roll and brought to the forefront for the first time a score of black female vocal groups, known collectively as the girl groups, who be-came overwhelmingly popular until disappearing under the onslaught of the mid-1960s British Invasion.
In 1962, thanks primarily to the girl groups, more black artists appeared on the year-
end singles charts than at any time in history. Between 1962 and 1963 alone, for example, the 
best-selling singles lists included the Crystals (“He’s a 
r
ebel,” “Da Doo 
r
on 
r
on,” “Then He 
Kissed Me”), the Sensations (“Let Me In”), the Chiffons (“He’s So Fine,” “
o
ne Fine Day”), the 
Essex (“Easier Said Than Done”), the 
r
onettes (“Be My Baby”), 
r
uby and the 
r
omantics (“
o
ur 
Day Will Come”), and the Motown groups Martha and the Vandellas (“Come and Get These Memories,” “Heat Wave,” “Quicksand”) and the Marvelettes (“Please Mr. Postman,” “Playboy”). By 1964, Motown’s Supremes had come into their own; they turned out fifteen hit singles in a row over the next few years. The only significant girl groups that were white were the Angels (“My Boyfriend’s Back”) and the Shangri-Las (“Leader of the Pack”). Still, as talented as these 
groups were, it is almost impossible to separate 
their artistry from the genius of the producers who molded their sound.
The Shirelles, from Passaic, 
n
ew Jersey, 
were the prototypical girl group. They first re-corded for the independent Tiara label formed by Florence Greenberg, one of the few women to own her own record company. The Shirelles’ Phil Spector is often regarded as the genius 
behind some of the most important “girl groups.” The “wall of sound” he created for 
them produced the perfect marriage of tech-
nology and rhythm and blues. It remains one of the defining sounds of the early 1960s.
152  ro CKI n’ o UTfirst hit, “I Met Him on a Sunday,” was written by the group; it sold so well locally that Decca 
picked it up for national distribution in 1958. Decca had no faith in the group, however, and their next records appeared on Greenberg’s Scepter label, produced by Luther Dixon, who 
shepherded the Shirelles through a string of hits from 1960 to 1962 that are now considered 
rock ‘n’ roll classics: “Will You Love Me Tomorrow,” “Dedicated to the 
o
ne I Love,” “Mama 
Said,” “Baby It’s You,” and “Soldier Boy.” “Will You Love Me Tomorrow” (1960), composed by Carole King and Gerry Goffin, was the true breakthrough, commercially and culturally—a song about the fateful decision to “go all the way” from a distinctly female point of view.
6 
Dixon’s production techniques, which combined a plaintive gospel call-and-response style with 
the urban sensibilities of uptown r&b, had become nearly a science, as were those developed 
simultaneously by Phil Spector and Berry Gordy.
Phil Spector, who worked with two of the most important groups, the Crystals and the 
r
onettes, is the producer most readily associated with the girl group phenomenon. Like Leiber 
and Stoller, with whom he apprenticed, Spector was a white man whose vision was to harness 
the wizardry of studio production and the precision of a professionally written song to the energy and vitality of rhythm and blues. Certainly, no better cultural milieu existed to nur-ture such a vision than the integrationist stance of the early civil rights movement. Indeed, “Spanish Harlem” (one of Spector’s first hits) and “Black Pearl” (his last) seem to underscore this connection. As David Hinckley has written, “That Spector helped bring to life a rose that 
was Spanish and a pearl that was Black reflects a human rainbow pop music did not always acknowledge so sympathetically.”
7
Spector’s artistic vision and genius for production were matched only by his egotism and 
paranoia. As to his control of every aspect of production, Tom Wolfe noted:HEAR  MORE
Phil Spector on 
MySearchLab
The Ronettes belted out some of the 
most memorable songs of the early 1960s. Often, however, a consider-
ation of their talent seemed to be 
overshadowed by a focus on their sexuality. Too bad the two could not have been appreciated equally. Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 153Spector does the whole thing. He writes the words and the music, scouts and signs up the talent. 
He takes them out to a recording studio in Los Angeles and runs the recording session himself. He puts them through hours and days of recording to get the two or three minutes he wants….He 
handles the control dials like an electronic maestro…using things like two pianos, a harpsichord 
and three guitars on one record; then re-recording the whole thing with esoteric dubbing and over -
dubbing effects—reinforcing instruments or voices—coming out with what is known throughout the industry as “the Spector sound.”
8
While other companies issued multiple releases simultane -
ously, Spector labored over and thoroughly promoted only a few 
records per year. Perhaps his most favored act was the 
r
onettes, 
a trio fronted by 
r
onnie (Veronica) Bennett—who became 
r
onnie 
Spector after her marriage to the producer. Songs such as “Be My 
Baby” and “Baby I Love You” (both 1963 releases) put forth musi-cal statements of female desire even more direct than those offered by the Shirelles, while Spector choreographed the group’s sound in his characteristic manner, 
 
fueled by his own unbounded desire for 
r
onnie.9
Treating his artists as one more element in the creation of a total sound, Spector’s work 
encouraged the notion of girl group singers as interchangeable entities on the pop assembly 
line. To offer but one example, Darlene Love recorded only two Top Forty hits (both with 
Spector in 1963) under her own name: “(Today I Met) The Boy I’m Gonna Marry” and “Wait 
Til’ My Bobby Gets Home.” However, she was part of the Blossoms, a group Spector used for background vocals, and a member of Bob B. Soxx & the Blue Jeans, another Spector group with two Top Forty hits: “Zip-A-Dee Doo-Dah” (1962) and “Why Do Lovers Break Each 
o
ther’s Hearts” (1963). She also sang lead on two of the Crystals’ biggest hits in 1962—
“He’s a 
r
ebel” and “He’s Sure the Boy I Love”—though she was never listed as a member of 
the group. In short, a substantial Darlene Love legacy has been compromised by the shoddy practice of crediting recordings incorrectly and the more general tendency to submerge the noteworthy talents of these women singers beneath a consideration of their producers’ overall 
sound.
10
Spector formed Philles r ecords (with Lester Sill) and soon became the best customer 
of some of the Brill Building’s best songwriting teams: Goffin and King, Barry Mann and 
Cynthia Weil, and Ellie Greenwich and Jeff Barry. While they turned out their share of 
schlock (see Chapter 5) , white songwriters and black vocalists together also accomplished 
culturally, in microcosm, one political dream of the early civil rights movement: an inte-
grated, productive society. 
n
owhere was this marriage better executed than in the classic 
hits of the girl groups (see the table). An extension of this development could be found in “blue-eyed soul,” heard to greatest effect in Spector’s work with the 
r
ighteous Brothers—
Bob Hatfield and Bill Medley—a white male pop/r&b duo who hit big with “You’ve Lost That Lovin’ Feelin’” (1964), written by Spector with Mann and Weil. Also purveyed by the Young 
r
ascals (“Good Lovin’,” “Groovin’”) and Mitch 
r
yder and the Detroit Wheels (“Sock 
It to Me, Baby”), blue-eyed soul capitalized on the color-blindness of the early civil rights 
movement, creating black-sounding music written by whites, produced by whites, and per-formed by whites that was accepted by blacks.Like Leiber and Stoller, with whom he 
apprenticed, Spector was a white man 
whose vision was to harness the wizardry 
of studio production and the precision of 
a professionally written song to the en-ergy and vitality of rhythm and blues.
154  ro CKI n’ o UTSelected Brill Building Girl Group Classics
Songwriter S Song Arti S t
Gerry Goffin and Carole King “One Fine Day” Chiffons
“Chains” Cookies
“Don’T Say Nothin’ Bad About My Baby” Cookies
“Will You Love me Tomorrow” Shirelles
“He Hit Me (It Felt Like a Kiss)” Crystals
(with Phil Spector) “Is This What I Get for Loving You?” Ronettes
Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil “Uptown” Crystals
“He’s Sure the Boy I Love” Crystals
(with Phil Spector) “Walking in the Rain” Ronettes
Gene Pitney “He’s a Rebel” Crystals
Ellie Greenwich and Jeff Barry
(with Phil Spector) “Da Doo Ron Ron” Crystals
(with Phil Spector) “Then He Kissed Me” Crystals
(with Phil Spector) “Chapel of Love” Dixie Cups
(with Phil Spector) “Be My Baby” Ronettes
(with Phil Spector) “Baby I Love You” Ronettes
(with Phil Spector) “Wait Til’ My Bobby Gets Home” Darlene Love
(with Phil Spector) “Not Too Young to Get Married” Bob B. Soxx & the Blue Jeans
(with Tony Powers) “Today I Met the Boy I’m Gonna Marry” Darlene Love
(with Tony Powers) “Why Do Lovers Break Each Others’ Hearts” Bob B. Soxx & the Blue Jeans
(With Shadow Morton) “Leader of the Pack” Shangri-Las
Brill Building writers also figured prominently in the success of the Shangri-Las, a white 
girl group. When producer George “Shadow” Morton discovered the Shangri-Las, he called 
on his friends Greenwich and Barry to help him write “Leader of the Pack” (1964), the group’s 
best-selling single. The song—whose tragic story ends with a motorcycle accident—was re-
corded with the sound of a real motorcycle and a horrifying crash as if to emphasize the power of the music. In these days before feminism, the Shangri-Las, like the other girl groups, were confined to singing about their relationships with men, but in their time, put forth a tougher, more rebellious image of women that went against the grain of conventional expectations.
11
The Brill Building songwriters who, through their work with 
the girl groups and others, composed the best rock ‘n’ roll of the era, 
almost never broached a topical issue. A case in point was the pop/
soul alliance between Brill Building writer/producers Burt Bacharach 
and Hal David and song stylist Dionne Warwick (“Walk on By,” “I Say a Little Prayer”), whose twenty-two Top Forty hits transformed 
HEAR  MORE
Audio Links on 
MySearchLab
The Brill Building songwriters who, 
through their work with the girl groups 
and others, composed the best rock ‘n’ 
roll of the era, almost never broached a 
topical issue.
 Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 155the writers’ lyric fluff into works of strength and beauty. The politics of female expressivity 
existed less in the content of the music than in the experiences to which the music gave rise. Generalizing from what feminist cultural critic Susan Douglas has said of the Shirelles, these 
women mattered “because they captured so well our confusion in the face of changing sexual 
mores. And as the confusion of real life intersected with the contradictions in popular culture, girls were prepared to start wondering, sooner or later, why sexual freedoms didn’t lead to other freedoms as well.”
12
Despite their impact, talent, and sophisticated production, girl group artists faced many 
obstacles: They were, in many ways, a throwback to a 1950s style, they were women, and they 
were black. After the British Invasion, only two girl group releases reached the Top Ten, the 
Shangri-Las’ “I Can 
n
ever Go Home Anymore” (1965) and the Chiffons’ “Sweet Talkin’ Guy” 
(1966). Motown’s female acts that survived and thrived did so because they transcended the 
girl group label; they were able to do so because Berry Gordy did not just produce great re-
cords, he built long-term careers.
Motown: The Integration of Pop
Motown developed and defined itself in the context of the early civil rights movement, where 
assimilation into the mainstream of American life was seen as desirable. The company soon integrated the pop market with a success unmatched in the history of the music industry. Un-
til its 1988 purchase by MCA and subsequent mergers with other industry giants, Motown 
was the largest black-owned corporation in the United States. Its founder, Berry Gordy, was a tough, black, middle-class jazz buff from Detroit who ran a small jazz record store in the mid-1950s. He was also a prizefighter with a number of wins to his credit. His association with Jackie Wilson, a Golden Gloves champion and r&b star for whom Gordy wrote several hits (discussed in Chapter 4), brought these two strands of his life together. After Gordy wrote and produced a Top Thirty hit for Barrett Strong (“Money,” 1960), recent acquaintance Smokey 
r
obinson of the Miracles convinced him to start his own company. This was the beginning of 
the Motown empire.
With few exceptions, Motown’s creative personnel—artists, writers, producers, and ses-
sion musicians—were African American and were groomed for long careers (if not paid ac-
cordingly). It was Gordy’s job to produce the records that would satisfy their pop needs. As secretive a company as there ever was, Motown was a completely in-house operation under the total control of Gordy. It included not only the Motown and Tamla labels but also the Hitsville USA studio, Jobete Publishing, and International Talent Management (ITM). ITM provided personal management, including choreographic training by industry veteran Cholly Atkins, lessons in etiquette from local beauty school owner Maxine Powell, and tour bookings.
Like Spector, Gordy evolved a production technique aimed 
at maximum crossover. Working closely with Smokey 
r
obinson 
on the label’s early releases, he multitracked compelling leads and 
rich gospel harmonies over strong rhythm and horn tracks and 
the signature bass lines of the legendary James Jamerson. In doing this, Gordy came up with a musical formula that was the perfect HEAR  MORE
Motown on 
MySearchLab
Gordy came up with a musical formula 
that was the perfect metaphor for the 
early civil rights era: upbeat black 
pop that was irresistibly danceable 
and threatening to no one in tone or content.
156  ro CKI n’ o UTmetaphor for the early civil rights era: upbeat black pop that was irresistibly danceable and 
threatening to no one in tone or content. This was the Motown Sound or, as the Motown label logo boasted, “The Sound of Young America.” Gordy would later comment that any successful 
Motown hit sold at least 70 percent to white audiences.
To his credit, Gordy built all of his acts from the ground up; he did not simply bleed 
them for one or two hits, an 
 
all-too-common experience for black artists in the past. As a re-
sult, first-generation Motown artists—the Miracles (“Shop Around”), the Marvelettes (“Please 
Mr. Postman”), Martha and the Vandellas (“Dancing in the Street”), the Temptations (“My Girl”), the Four Tops (“I Can’t Help Myself ”), Marvin Gaye (“Pride and Joy”), and 
 
Stevie Won-
der (“Fingertips—Part 2”), among others—enjoyed a longevity almost unheard of for black artists in the pop market. While other labels may have treated particularly successful groups with such care, Motown approached its whole roster in these terms. From 1961 to 1971, the 
company placed well over 100 singles in the pop Top Ten, not to mention scores of lesser hits.
Motown hit its stride in 1964 when the Supremes were assigned to the writer/producer 
team of Eddie Holland, Lamont Dozier, and Brian Holland. The trio of Florence Ballard, Mary Wilson, and Diana 
r
oss quickly became the crown jewel of the Motown empire. Beginning HEAR  MORE
Audio Links of 
Selected Motown 
Top Ten Hits on MySearchLab
Beginning with a modest studio in Detroit, 
Berry Gordy built his Motown empire into the largest black-owned corporation in the 
United States and opened a new chapter in 
the treatment of African American artists in the music industry. The Supremes, pictured with him, became one of the label’s most 
successful acts. Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 157with “Where Did o ur Love Go,” the Supremes turned out five number one singles in a row, 
including “Baby Love,” “Come See About Me,” “Stop! In the 
n
ame of Love,” and “Back in My 
Arms Again”—no mean achievement for an African American act during the first wave of the 
British Invasion. By the time Cindy Birdsong (formerly of Patti LaBelle and the Blue Belles) 
replaced Ballard in 1967, the group had turned out five more number one hits.
Motown’s understanding of the Top Forty radio format, as well as its outstanding artists 
and production, enabled the company to produce countless hits. 
o
n Top Forty radio, records 
were squeezed in between commercials and fast-talking deejays. Understanding these con-straints, Smokey 
r
obinson sought to exercise maximum creativity in a two- to three-minute 
timeframe. In his own words: “My theory of writing is to write a song that has a complete idea and tells a story in the time allotted for a record….I’ve just geared myself to radio time. The shorter a record is nowadays, the more it’s gonna be played.”
13 While such a formula may have 
structured a song, it could not substitute for creativity. With songwriters like Eddie Holland, 
Lamont Dozier, and Brian Holland (“Where Did 
o
ur Love Go”), 
n
orman Whitfield (“Pride 
and Joy”), and 
n
ick Ashford and Valerie Simpson (“ Ain’t 
n
o Mountain High Enough”), 
 
Motown 
boasted an in-house staff that could rival the best of the Brill Building writers.
In his quest for a mainstream audience, Gordy adopted the Brill Building aesthetic 
that controversial issues had no place in Motown songs. “[W]hen it came to lyrics,” as Gerri 
 
Hershey has said, Berry Gordy “had a larger constituency to consider. . . . Gordy’s demo -
graphics could countenance no overt militancy.”14 It should not be 
surprising, then, that socially relevant themes and images were no more prevalent in early Motown lyrics than in any other genre of 
pop, rock, or rhythm and blues. Music from the label could assume 
political overtones in connection with current events. Martha and the Vandellas’ upbeat “Dancing in the Street” (1965), for example, took on new meanings in the aftermath of the 1965 urban uprising in Watts.
15 Still, Stevie 
Wonder’s 1966 cover of “Blowin’ in the Wind” remained Motown’s most prominent “topical” 
release until the later 1960s and early 1970s, when artists like Wonder, Marvin Gaye, and the 
Temptations went against the grain of Berry Gordy’s restrictive attitude toward social com-
mentary. Thus, while the climate of the early civil rights movement encouraged the success of Motown, the company never became a voice for the cause. During this period, social commen-tary could be found primarily in the folk arena and, to a lesser extent, in jazz.
Folk Music: The Voice of Civil Rights
It is impossible to analyze the 1960s folk revival without mentioning Woody Guthrie and 
Pete Seeger, avowed left-wing activists since the 1930s. Guthrie was an 
o
kie—someone who 
traveled to California with other 
o
klahomans during the Dust Bowl era, learning folk and 
blues along the way and writing songs about his experiences. 
r
adicalized by his experiences 
of the Great Depression and his associations with left-wing activists in California and then 
n
ew York, Guthrie wrote some of this country’s most enduring folk songs, including “This 
Land Is Your Land,” “So Long, It’s Been Good to Know You,” and “This Train Is Bound for 
Glory.” Indeed, he helped to create the association between folk music and leftist politics that HEAR  MORE
Audio Links of 
Selected Motown 
Staff Writers’ Hits on MySearchLab
In his quest for a mainstream audience,  
Gordy adopted the Brill Building 
 
aesthetic that controversial issues had 
no place in Motown songs.
158  ro CKI n’ o UTListening Guide 12The Supremes (Diana Ross, Florence Ballard, and Mary Wilson) were 
 
Motown’s most successful girl group, part of a roster that also included the 
Marvelettes and Martha and the Vandellas. Berry Gordy employed a whole 
team of music coaches, choreographers, fashion consultants, and model-
ing coaches for his artists in order to create the sleek, elegant image ex-emplified by the Supremes. Their sound, which took America by storm, was the combined result of their beautifully blended voices, Motown’s roster 
of great recording session players and arrangers, and songwriters such as 
Smokey Robinson and the team of Eddie Holland, Lamont Dozier, and Brian Hol-
land, who wrote “Stop! In the Name of Love.”
“Stop! In the Name of Love” garnered a Grammy nomination in 1966. Gordy’s formula for crossover appeal was bear-
ing fruit in many ways: “Stop! In the Name of Love” was nominated in the “Best Contemporary Rock and Roll Group Vocal Performance” category and not the “Rhythm and Blues” category, as the Supreme’s “Baby Love” had been a year before.
Musical Style Notes
Motown’s songwriters were masters of the Top Forty pop song: a simple, familiar musical structure consisting of short 
verses and catchy, up-tempo refrains, usually with one brief solo improvisation over an instrumental verse. Brevity was another consideration; few pop singles were over three minutes long. “Stop! In the Name of Love” is a classic example 
of this kind of structure and also features a signature Motown combination: a strong lead singer plus doo wop–influenced 
background vocals, combined with slick, tightly arranged instrumental parts provided by a roster of virtuoso studio musi-cians known as the Funk Brothers. The Funk Brothers’ roster included a long list of distinguished players, including the unmistakable Motown rhythm section of drummer Benny Benjamin and bass player James Jamerson.
Musical “Road Map”
timing S Comment S 
0:00–0:10 Electronic organ glissando (rapid slide up through several notes) leads into refrain.
0:10–0:19 Instrumental interlude between refrain and verse.
0:19–0:51 Verse 1
0:28 Background vocals begin.
0:43 Background vocals: “Think it over” (using same melody as refrain’s last phrase).
0:51–1:17 Refrain (repeated twice)
(no instrumental interlude here)
1:17–1:51 Verse 2
1:26 Background vocals begin.
1:42 Background vocals: “Think it over” (using same melody as refrain’s last phrase).
1:51–2:16 Refrain (repeated twice)
2:16–2:33 Verse 3
2:24 Background vocals begin. (“Think it over” phrase omitted in this verse—instead, they proceed 
directly into the refrain.)
2:33–2:54 Refrain (repeated twice)“Stop! In the Name of Love”
Artist:
 
The Supremes
Music/Lyrics by Eddie Holland, 
Lamont Dozier, and Brian Holland
Label:
 
Motown (1965) Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 159was reflected in the statement displayed on his guitar: “This machine kills fascists.” Seeger was 
a college-educated, 
n
ew York radical who saw music as a means to mobilize a mass movement. 
Guthrie and Seeger formed the Almanac Singers in 1941 and promoted their progressive po-
litical message throughout the country. In the early 1950s, Seeger recorded million-selling re-
cords as a member of the Weavers. His disaffection with pop success and persecution in the face of McCarthyism, however, forced his career into the background. By this time, Guthrie was seriously debilitated by Huntington’s chorea. From the 1950s until his death in 1967, he was bedridden; among his visitors was the young Bob Dylan, who described himself as something of a Woody Guthrie jukebox.
The civil rights movement was a natural outlet for Pete Seeger’s creative and political 
energies. More than anyone else, Seeger tirelessly popularized the movement’s anthem, “We Shall 
o
vercome,” to a global audience. While he was a folk purist who seldom basked in the 
limelight himself, his guiding hand was never far from view. “If I Had a Hammer,” a song he 
wrote in 1949 with Lee Hays, became a Top Ten hit in 1962 for Peter, Paul, and Mary and again in 1963 for Trini Lopez. The Kingston Trio scored in 1962 with his “Where Have All the Flowers Gone.” And the Byrds had a number one folk-rock hit with his “Turn! Turn! Turn!” in 1965, although Seeger hadn’t yet come to grips with his misgivings about the marriage of folk and rock.
In folk circles at the time, there was a fiercely argued distinction between performers 
considered “authentic” and those considered “commercial.” For most, Seeger defined authen-ticity, while the Kingston Trio and the groups that garnered Top Forty hits from popularized folk material like the 
r
ooftop Singers (“Walk 
r
ight In,” 1963) and the 
n
ew Christy Minstrels 
(“Green, Green,” 1963) were clearly commercial. The distinction, of course, was riddled with 
inconsistency. Eric Darling, leader of the 
r
ooftop Singers, had been a member of the Weavers 
with Seeger. Joan Baez was considered authentic even though she charted twelve Top Forty 
long-playing records (LPs), six of which were certified gold albums. As activist liberals with commercial success, Peter, Paul, and Mary straddled the fence.
The artist who openly challenged the distinction and ultimately rendered it useless was 
a newcomer—the enigmatic Bob Dylan. Born 
r
obert Zimmerman into a middle-class 
 
Jewish 
family, Dylan grew up in Hibbing, Minnesota, listening to a 1950s mixture of rhythm and blues, country and western, rock ‘n’ roll, and pop. After attending college for a while and reading Guthrie’s autobiography, Bound for Glory, Zimmerman moved to 
n
ew York, where 
he 
 
began building his own myth as a Guthrie-style folk singer. He also legalized his newly 
acquired surname and shrouded his earlier life in mystery. He was signed by John Hammond to Columbia in 1962 and, over the next two years, issued three albums of highly unorthodox, mostly self-accompanied acoustic folk to critical raves.
With selections like “
o
xford Town” (1963), about racism in a Mississippi town, and “The 
Lonesome Death of Hattie Carroll” (1964), the true story of the killing of a black woman, Dylan was early proclaimed a leader in the civil rights movement. In 1963, he performed “
o
nly 
a Pawn in Their Game,” a song about the murder of civil rights leader Medgar Evers, at the March on Washington, where he stood next to Martin Luther King, Jr., and shared the stage with folk luminaries such as Pete Seeger, Joan Baez, and Peter, Paul, and Mary. (That same year, Peter, Paul, and Mary had Top Ten pop hits with Dylan’s “Blowin’ in the Wind” and HEAR  MORE
Bob Dylan on 
MySearchLab160  ro CKI n’ o UTAfter sitting at the feet of an ailing Woody Guthrie, the 
 freewheeling Bob Dylan shrouded his past in mystery and set about building his own myth as a Guthrie-style folksinger. 
The early civil rights movement provided him with the perfect 
springboard to success.
“Don’t Think Twice, It’s Alright.”) In three 
short years, then, Dylan was well along the road to transforming, almost singlehandedly, 
popular music’s lyric content. At this point, he 
made a musical decision that called his authen-ticity into question among the folk purists but brought him a mass audience in return.
In 1965, Dylan appeared at the 
n
ewport 
Folk Festival playing an electric guitar (a clas-sic rock Fender Stratocaster, no less), backed by an electric band that included guitarist Michael Bloomfield and keyboardist Al Kooper, and performed some material from his new 
 
album, Bringing It All Back Home. Accounts vary as to what happened next—some say that 
the audience booed in unison, and that the iconic Pete Seeger was so livid he tried to cut the 
cord to the power supply with an ax. 
o
thers claim that the audience response was far from 
unified and that Seeger’s anger has been overstated.16 Beyond dispute is that the moment 
marked a turning point in the history of rock’s relationship with the folk revival. Dylan re-
leased his first album in 1962 as Tom Hayden and other radical students were writing “The 
Port Huron Statement,” the manifesto of Students for a Democratic Society (SDS). In a world 
of increasing student activism folk offered an alternative to rock ‘n’ roll’s lyric vacuity, but it could never supplant the more primal urges that rhythm and blues and rock ‘n’ roll had turned loose. For this reason, folk could never capture a mass audience. Bridging that gap was Dylan’s particular genius.
From the start, Dylan had been no straightforward folk musician. As he recounted 
in his memoir, his songwriting voice emerged slowly, and was as much shaped by the influ -
ence of the German songwriter Kurt Weill and his collaborator, playwright Bertolt Brecht, as by Woody Guthrie and 
r
obert Johnson.17 Even before he went electric, Dylan’s music 
had been changing—his “topical” songwriting style gave way, on 1964’s Another Side of 
Bob Dylan, to a more subjective, surreal approach. Bringing It All Back Home continued this 
change as it alternated one acoustic side and one side of electric music with uncommonly 
substantive lyrics held up by a hard-driving, straight-ahead rock ‘n’ roll beat. “Subterranean Homesick Blues,” the first cut on the electric side, became his first Top Forty pop hit, and a roar of outrage arose from the folk community. Was Dylan the true seer the folkies had once thought he was or the consummate opportunist they now criticized? It depended on who was asked. Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 161
Listening Guide 13“The Times They Are A-Changin’” (1964), like the LP that shares its name, 
represents the Bob Dylan that became, perhaps somewhat reluctantly, a 
political and social spokesperson for his generation. Dylan captured in his 
lyrics a time when the youth movement was growing in strength, when the 
civil rights movement was making sea changes in the cultural landscape of America, and when we still thought that music might change the world.
Musical Style Notes
“The Times They Are A-Changin’” features a relatively short, repeated-verse structure with a simple acoustic guitar ac-
companiment. The occasional harmonica comment adds some color to the arrangement and strengthens the listener’s 
association with the American folk music tradition of Woody Guthrie and Pete Seeger. The time-honored combination of 
solo voice with one accompanying instrument played in a relatively simple manner serves to foreground the lyrics, an ef-
fective combination for any genre that prioritizes lyric content over musical complexity.
Musical “Road Map”
timing S Comment S 
0:0–0:3 Introduction; acoustic guitar
0:3–0:32 Verse 1
0:33–0:40 Harmonica bridge to second verse
0:40–1:07 Verse 2
1:08–1:18 Harmonica bridge to third verse
1:19–1:45 Verse 3
1:46–1:52 Harmonica bridge to fourth verse
1:53–2:19 Verse 4
2:20–2:37 Harmonica bridge to fifth verse
2:37–3:04 Verse 5
3:04–3:11 Harmonica fades to end of song“The Times They Are 
A-Changin’”
Artist: Bob Dylan
Music/Lyrics by Bob DylanLabel: Columbia (1964)162  ro CKI n’ o UTAppearing to turn his back on politics, Dylan was often contrasted with Phil o chs, whose 
songs such as “Here’s to the State of Mississippi” and “I Ain’t Marching Anymore” from his 
second album, remained true to the folk protest ideal, but who remained tortured by his inabil-
ity to become “the first left-wing star.” Dylan, by contrast, soon left 
his detractors in the dust as he ushered in the era of folk rock. “Like a 
r
olling Stone,” the 1965 song that was released just days before 
his appearance at 
n
ewport and would anchor his album, Highway 
61 Revisited, was like the ultimate kiss-off to the movement that had given him his reputation—its opening crack of his drummer’s rim shot set the stage for six minutes of venomous criticism directed 
against naiveté and pretension, shrouded by electric guitar and organ played in a way that threw the sound of folk music off like it was a shackle.
The debate over commercial versus authentic performers tended to obscure a far more 
important issue at the time. From old-timers like Pete Seeger to newcomers like Joan Baez, Bob 
Dylan, and Peter, Paul, and Mary, the best-known artists in folk music were white. Seeger, to his credit, included African Americans (for example, 
o
detta, Sonny Terry, and Brownie Mc-
Ghee) in his concerts and on his albums; gradually, these artists became prominent voices of 
the civil rights movement. During the initial surge of the folk revival, however, artists of color who performed folkloric material, from Lead Belly to Josh White, seldom became well known outside folk circles.
Harry Belafonte, an outspoken activist and a director of Martin Luther King’s Southern 
Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), was an obvious exception. In 1960, he recorded a second million-selling live album at Carnegie Hall, including 
o
detta, Miriam Makeba, and the 
Chad Mitchell Trio—but his music and his acting and television career seemed curiously sepa-rate from his political choices. Another exception of sorts was Trini Lopez who, like 
r
itchie 
Valens before him, included Mexican and American popular and folk material in his reper-toire. His best-selling “Lemon Tree” (1965) was adapted from the traditional Latin song “Ho-jita de Limón.” Buffy Sainte-Marie (a Cree Indian from Canada) wrote original compositions such as “
n
ow That the Buffalo’s Gone” and “My Country ‘Tis of Thy People You’re Dying” 
that 
 
offered her limited audience a profoundly different view of 
n
ative Americans than that 
 
expressed by pop fare such as Johnny Preston’s “
r
unning Bear.”
By the mid-1960s the social consciousness of folk music became linked to the popular 
 
appeal of gospel/r&b fusion. The center for this innovation was Chicago. There, the Staple Singers, a family gospel group that recorded for Vee Jay in the late 1950s, recorded spiritual classics such as “ Amazing Grace” and “We Shall 
o
vercome” in the early 1960s with electric 
guitar and drums. More substantial was the contribution of the often under-appreciated Curtis 
Mayfield. After hits with the Impressions—“For Your Precious Love” (1958), “Gypsy Woman” (1961), and “It’s All 
r
ight” (1963)—Mayfield penned a series of successful folk-sounding but 
pop-produced “sermon songs” for the group, including “Keep on Pushing” and “ Amen” in 1964 
and “People Get 
r
eady” in 1965. Through these songs, he became, in the words of 
n
elson 
George, “black music’s most unflagging civil rights champion.”18
A last Chicago connection comes through Sam Cooke. The singer made a mild but 
successful foray into social commentary as early as 1960 when “Chain Gang” went to In a world of increasing student activ-
ism folk offered an alternative to rock 
‘n’ roll’s lyric vacuity, but it could never 
supplant the more primal urges that 
rhythm and blues and rock ‘n’ roll had turned loose. For this reason, folk could never capture a mass audience.
 Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 163number two on the pop charts, but not until he heard Dylan’s “Blowin’ in the Wind” did 
he felt compelled to relate to the civil rights movement more directly. In late 1964, he at-tempted a pop/folk fusion with “ A Change Is Gonna Come.” By the time the record was 
released, however, Cooke had been shot to death under unsavory circumstances. When his 
friend Malcolm X was assassinated only two months later, on February 21, 1965, “ A Change Is Gonna Come” was moving up the charts to Top Forty status. It stands as Cooke’s monu-ment to civil rights.
The British Invasion Occupies The Pop Charts
The promise of President John F . Kennedy’s n ew Frontier, as his blueprint for America was 
called, was dealt a crushing blow when he was assassinated on 
n
ovember 22, 1963. In the 
aftermath of his death, the national mood was one of defeat and depression. It is noteworthy 
that in the six months between Kennedy’s assassination and the passage of the Civil 
r
ights 
Act of 1964, the Beatles’ upbeat sound captured the cultural life of the nation. “In retrospect,” 
as critic Lester Bangs has written, “it seems obvious that this elevation of our mood had to come from outside the parameters of America’s own musical culture, if only because the folk music which then dominated American pop was so tied to the crushed dreams of the 
n
ew 
Frontier.”19
The Beatles transformed popular music just as the issue of civil rights became per-
manently imprinted on the national consciousness. For both the Beatles and the civil rights 
SEE MORE
The Beatles 
 
documentary on 
MySearchLab
The Beatles were not what they appeared to be. After paying their dues in 
the rough-and-tumble nightclubs of Hamburg, manager Brian Epstein dressed them up in suits and ties and went to great pains to present them as clean-
cut entertainers.
164  ro CKI n’ o UTmovement, the time was right; for both, the results were profound. 
So dramatic was the Beatles’ impact that, from a cultural point of view, there is a tendency to think that the sixties (that is, the 
 cultural era) began in 1964, the year the group hit the U.S. pop 
charts. Greil 
 
Marcus 
 
described the effect they had as a “pop explo-
sion,” defined as “an irresistible cultural upheaval that cuts across 
lines of class and race…and, most crucially, divides society itself by age.”20 It was as if the 
country had simply been marking time for four years, waiting for their arrival.
There were many reasons for this perception. First, the Beatles made their American 
 
debut 
at a time when the U.S. music industry was stagnating. While the industry had more than dou-bled in size between 1955 and 1959, record sales had fallen by 5 percent (to $600 million) in 1960. By 1963, sales were up by only 1.6 percent from the previous year. After 1964, the industry had double-digit growth every year until the end of the decade and, including tape sales, more than doubled its revenues (to about $1.6 billion). The Beatles did not rejuvenate the music busi-ness singlehandedly, but other artists paled in the face of their impressive statistics and fresh sound. By February 1964, they had become the country’s hottest act, although they had yet to step foot on U.S. soil. In mid-April they had twelve singles in the Billboard Hot 100 , including 
the top five positions. In 1964 alone, they charted thirty singles and released six best-selling 
albums. Billboard reported that, for a period of about three weeks, the Beatles accounted for 
nearly 60 percent of all singles sold. From 1963 to 1968, the group sold an estimated $154 mil-lion worth of records worldwide.
21 not even Elvis in his heyday could compete with numbers 
like these.
Second, the Beatles eclipsed all other talent so quickly and so completely that many lost 
sight of the fact that, prior to their arrival, the most exciting developments in popular music  
had been in African American music. Indeed, the Beatles’ first album in the United States, 
 
Introducing…The Beatles, which included five Top Ten singles, was released on the black-owned 
Vee Jay label. The early sound of the Beatles, the Animals, and the 
r
olling Stones, among oth-
ers, derived much of its inspiration directly from African American blues and r&b artists. Many of the Beatles’ early recordings were nearly note-for-note reproductions of African American rock ‘n’ roll classics. This is not to suggest that the Beatles could, in any way, be reduced to mere cover artists. Their motivation in rerecording so many African American hits was less to cash in on black culture than to pay tribute to their musical forebears. The Beatles openly 
credited Chuck Berry, the Miracles, Chuck Jackson, and Ben E. King as formative influences, introducing (along with the Animals, the 
r
olling Stones, and to a lesser extent the Dave Clark 
Five) a generation of white, middle-class Americans to the rich tradition of African American music that had always existed within earshot. Still, it was a fact of American life that, though repeatedly acknowledging their debt to African American music and touring with early rock ‘n’ roll greats like Little 
r
ichard, the Beatles and other English groups were more marketable 
than the African American artists they admired.
In the two years following the Beatles’ arrival, no fewer than two dozen British groups 
appeared on the U.S. pop charts. The previous year there had been none. But if the British In-vasion dominated the U.S. pop charts generally, there was another development that was par-ticularly devastating for black artists. In keeping with the integrationist impulse of the early HEAR  MORE
 Audio Links for 
 
British 
Invasion Blues/R&B 
 
Recordings on 
MySearchLabSo dramatic was the Beatles’ impact 
that, from a cultural point of view, there 
is a tendency to think that the sixties 
(that is, the cultural era) began in 1964, 
the year the group hit the U.S. pop charts.
 Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 165civil rights movement, the r&b charts were briefly discontinued 
from the end of 1963 until the beginning of 1965. If the separate and unequal r&b market was problematic, “integration” proved to 
be more so. In 1962, 42 percent of the songs on the year-end singles 
charts were by African Americans. In 1966, this figure declined to 22 percent, the lowest point since the initial surge of rock ‘n’ roll. 
o
nly three of the top fifty albums for the years 1964 and 1965 were 
by black artists. In contrast, nearly one-third of the Top Ten re-
leases for 1964 belonged to British acts.
Among African American artists, Motown acts survived the first wave of the British 
Invasion better than most. Berry Gordy purposefully forged alliances with popular British groups, as with the Supremes’ third album, A Bit of Liverpool (1964), that showcased cover 
tunes from the Beatles and other British groups. In two important telecasts, T .A.M.I. (1964) and TNT (1965), the Supremes, Smokey 
r
obinson and the Miracles, and Marvin Gaye ap-
peared with the British bands Gerry and the Pacemakers and the 
r
olling Stones.22 British mu-
sic variety television show Ready Steady Go! devoted an entire episode to the Motown sound 
in 1965. When Motown launched a tour of Britain featuring a number of the company’s best-
selling artists that year, everybody gushed. The Beatles lauded the music at every opportunity. 
If there had been any misconceptions about where Berry Gordy sought to position Motown on the pop music continuum, his remarks laid them to rest: “We are very honored the Beatles should have said what they did. . . . They’re creating the same type of music as we are and we’re part of the same stream.”
23
At its best, the British Invasion recalled the enthusiasm of early rock ‘n’ roll and 
pointed the way to numerous future developments in popular music. Yet the taste for 
anything British could seem indiscriminate, and British acts like Chad and Jeremy (“Yes -
terday’s Gone”) had Top Ten pop hits in the United States while remaining completely 
unknown at home. The groups identified with the first wave of the British Invasion came from throughout the British Commonwealth. The Zombies (“She’s 
n
ot There”) hailed 
from Hertfordshire; the Moody Blues (“Go 
n
ow!”), from Birmingham; Peter and Gordon 
(“ A World without Love”), from Scotland; Them (“Here Comes the 
n
ight,” “Gloria”), 
from Ireland; the Seekers (“I’ll 
n
ever Find Another You”), from Australia. The Animals 
(“House of the 
 r
ising Sun,” 1964), from 
n
ewcastle, were an influential blues-based group 
that was steeped in African American music. Lead singer Eric Burdon’s hard, bluesy de-
livery over Alan Price’s soulful organ riffs prompted Ebony magazine to devote five pages 
to Burdon and his group’s funky sound, rare coverage for a white singer, even one as ob-sessed with blackness as Burdon.
24 Mostly, however, the British Invasion came from three 
cities—
 
Liverpool, Manchester, and London.
The Beatles, of course, came from Liverpool, as did the Searchers (“
n
eedles and Pins”), 
Gerry and the Pacemakers (“Don’t Let the Sun Catch You Crying,” “Ferry Cross the Mersey”), 
Billy J. Kramer and the Dakotas (“Little Children”), Cilla Black (“You’re My World”), and the 
Swinging Blue Jeans (“Hippy Hippy Shake”). Although Liverpool was a dreary, gray, industrial seaport town, a rock ‘n’ roll culture had flourished among its working-class residents due to the steady stream of U.S. merchant marines who brought records over. 
o
nce absorbed, rock ‘n’ It was a fact of American life that, 
though repeatedly acknowledging their 
debt to African American music and 
touring with early rock ‘n’ roll greats like 
Little Richard, the Beatles and other English groups were more marketable than the African American artists they 
admired.
166  ro CKI n’ o UTroll mingled with British folk styles and achieved pop status in a type of music known as skiffle. 
Skiffle was fleetingly exposed to American audiences in Lonnie Donegan’s “
r
ock Island Line” 
(1956) and “Does Your Chewing Gum Lose Its Flavor (
o
n the Bedpost 
o
ver 
n
ight)” (1961). 
John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison, and Stuart Sutcliffe (who later died of a brain 
hemorrhage) played skiffle as the Quarrymen. This was the musical amalgam that shaped the Beatles, but they paid their dues playing rock ‘n’ roll in the rough-and-tumble nightclubs of the German port city of Hamburg.
In Hamburg, according to Beatles scholar Devin McKinney, lay the roots of what would 
become called Beatlemania, the Beatles being pushed to new highs by a demanding German audience, and then pushing back.
25 By the time they played there, the Quarrymen had metamor-
phosed to Johnny and the Moondogs, then to the Silver Beetles, and at last to simply the Beatles, 
with Pete Best on drums. When they returned home, they were showcased with the best-known 
Liverpudlian groups at a dingy basement club called the Cavern, where they first came to the 
attention of Brian Epstein, record-store owner turned manager. Like all beat groups, the Beatles had mastered a standard rock ‘n’ roll repertoire of Chuck Berry, Little 
r
ichard, Elvis Presley, 
and Buddy Holly, as well as numerous r&b crossover classics. Unlike many of the groups, how-
ever, Lennon and McCartney wrote original songs right from the beginning.
Under the brilliant tutelage of Epstein, and signed by producer George Martin to EMI, 
the first Beatles single, “Love Me Do” (with 
r
ingo Starr replacing Best on drums), went Top 
Twenty in Great Britain in 1962. Further successes followed quickly and when in late 1963, 
another Lennon–McCartney original, “She Loves You,” became the best-selling single in British  
history, Epstein decided the group was ready to take on the United States. The “fab four” 
 
arrived in 
n
ew York on February 7, 1964, when “I Want to Hold Your Hand” was the number 
one single in the United States. For the next six months, they occupied the number one slot on 
the U.S. pop charts with a string of Lennon–McCartney tunes. Their first movie, A Hard Day’s Night, a black-and-white film by director 
r
ichard Lester about a day in the life of the group, 
opened in August to rave reviews. The soundtrack album yielded two Top Ten singles—the title song and “Can’t Buy Me Love.” In a few short months, the Beatles had established an 
 
impregnable beachhead for the British Invasion.
The city of Manchester turned out the notable sounds of Wayne Fontana and the 
Mindbenders—who spent one glorious week at number one with “The Game of Love” (1965)—and the Hollies, whose close harmonies set them apart from other Manchester 
groups, even if their biggest hit of the 1960s was the insipid “Bus Stop” (1966). (Graham 
n
ash left the group in 1968 to “make records that say something” with David Crosby and 
Stephen Stills in Los Angeles.) Herman’s Hermits (“Mrs. Brown, You’ve Got a Lovely 
Daughter,” “I’m Henry VIII, I Am”) presented a version of the rock ‘n’ roll/skiffle fusion that showed how low a pop interpretation of the British music hall tradition could sink. Even so, between 1964 and 1970, Herman’s Hermits charted eighteen Top Forty singles and ten albums in the United States.
London featured a far more eclectic mix of artists than either Liverpool or Manchester: 
the jazz-influenced Manfred Mann (“Doo Wah Diddy Diddy”); the soulful Dusty Springfield (“I 
o
nly Want to Be with You,” “You Don’t Have to Say You Love Me”) and pop-oriented  Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 167Petula Clark (“Downtown,” “I Know a Place”), two women who held their own throughout the 
decade; the Dave Clark Five (“Glad All 
o
ver”), whose pneumatic drumming, raspy vocals, and 
r&b covers pointed the way to success; and, finally, the hard-rocking Kinks and the 
r
olling 
Stones, the band that outlasted them all.
Under the leadership of writer/vocalist/guitarist 
r
ay Davies, the Kinks took the 
United States by storm in late 1964 with three original Top Ten hard rockers (“You 
r
eally 
Got Me,” “ All Day and All of the 
n
ight,” and “Tired of Waiting for You”)—songs whose 
coarse, distorted power chords foreshadowed the sound of heavy metal to come. After these 
releases, the group seemed to stall commercially. Whether due to the union problems they encountered on their first U.S. tour, or the lack of an effective promotional apparatus, or because their follow-up hits (“ A Well 
r
espected Man” and “Dedicated Follower of Fashion”) 
were so distinctly British as to be lost on U.S. audiences, the Kinks never attained the stature 
that should have been their due.
The London musicians who had the most influence on U.S. music were the white 
blues revivalists, most of whom got their start with Alexis Korner’s Blues Incorporated or John Mayall’s Blues Breakers. Among the musicians who passed through these ensembles were Mick Fleetwood, John McVie, and Peter Green of Fleetwood Mac; Eric Clapton, Jack Bruce, and Ginger Baker, who went on to become Cream; 
r
ay Davies of Kinks fame; future 
members of Pentangle, Free, and Led Zeppelin; and four founders of the 
r
olling Stones—
lead singer Mick Jagger, guitarists Keith 
r
ichards and Brian Jones, and drummer Charlie 
Watts.
Like most British rockers at the time, the 
r
olling Stones included a good deal of African 
American music in their repertoire. Even when pushed by their manager to write original 
material (“It’s All 
o
ver 
n
ow,” “The Last Time”), it was clear that the tradition they wished 
to explore, the musical statement they wanted to make, was based in the blues. Keith 
r
ichards 
acknowledged the band’s sources in his autobiography: “We went for a Chicago blues sound, 
as close as we could get it—two guitars, bass and drums and a piano—and sat around and listened to every Chess record ever made.”
26 While the Stones displayed the typical British fascina-
tion with African American culture, though, they had sufficient 
distance from it that Jagger could pull off his self-mocking deliv-
ery of African American styles with ironic detachment. Epitomiz-
ing this aspect of the band was its defining hit single, “(I Can’t Get 
n
o) Satisfaction” (1965), which took the quintessential blues 
sentiment of its title phrase and turned it into a stinging state-ment about the frustrations of modern consumerism, against which the sharply distorted melodic hook of Keith 
r
ichards’ guitar line provided ringing counterpoint. 
o
n the strength 
of such material, 
r
obert Christgau claimed that the Stones promoted a sort of “mass bohe-
mianism” that was a counterpart to the “pop explosion” generated by the Beatles—a reac-tion against the accessible pleasures of consumer culture that paradoxically became broadly 
popular in its own right, and left a deep imprint on the cultural attitudes that defined rock during the mid to late 1960s.
27SEE MORE
The Rolling Stones 
documentary on MySearchLabThe Rolling Stones included a good 
deal of African American music in their 
repertoire. Even when pushed by their 
manager to write original material (“It’s 
All Over Now,” “The Last Time”), it was clear that the tradition they wished to explore, the musical statement they 
wanted to make, was based in the blues.
168  ro CKI n’ o UTThe Stones took longer to arrive in the United States than the Beatles, but when they 
did, they were embraced as the menacing, street-toughened alternative to the playful mop-tops. 
In fact, a comparison of the two groups’ marketing strategies provides a study in image con-
struction driven by issues of class and culture. As revolutionary as the Beatles’ music may have 
sounded, Brian Epstein took great pains to present the group as middle-class family entertain-ment. Andrew Loog 
o
ldham, the Stones’ manager and former Epstein employee, cultivated 
precisely the opposite image for his group. The Beatles wanted only “to hold your hand.” The 
Stones wanted to “spend the night together.” The first U.S. appearance of the Beatles was on the Ed Sullivan Show. After the Stones played the same show,  Sullivan vowed that they would 
never return.
o
f course, neither the Beatles nor the 
r
olling Stones were quite what they appeared to 
be. Though John had attended art school (and hated it), the Beatles were more solidly work-
ing class than the Stones; they had played Hamburg in slicked-back hair and black leather jackets before Epstein scrubbed them clean and dressed them up in suits and ties. 
o
nly two 
of the Stones—Bill Wyman and Charlie Watts—came from working-class backgrounds. Brian Jones, the Stones’ first rhythm guitarist (who drowned in 1969), was an upper-middle-class dropout. Keith 
r
ichards attended art school, and Mick Jagger remained a student at 
the London School of Economics until the group became a going concern. They were no more “street-fighting men” than the Beatles were wholesome and carefree. Certainly, the Beatles were as well-schooled in contemporary African American music as the Stones, but the group’s equally strong affinity for skiffle and the British music hall tradition resonated more with another musical phenomenon that was beginning to bloom in the United States—folk rock.At the beginning of their career, the Rolling 
Stones, the bad boys of sixties rock, looked more youthful than tough. They went on 
to become one of the longest-running and 
most successful self-contained rock acts in the business.
 Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 169Breaking the Sounds of Silence:  
New Voices in the Music
Given the folk revival’s stringent requirements for authenticity, it would have been difficult 
for Bob Dylan to trumpet his admiration for the Beatles in 1964, but his attraction to the group started him thinking more seriously about recording with other musicians and mov-
ing in a rock ‘n’ roll direction. As he later confessed to Anthony Scaduto, his first serious 
biographer:
I had heard the Beatles in New York when they first hit. Then, when we were driving through 
Colorado we had the radio on and eight of the ten top songs were Beatles songs. In Colorado! I Wanna Hold Your Hand, all those early ones.
They were doing these things nobody was doing. Their chords were outrageous, just out-
rageous, and their harmonies made it all valid. You could only do that with other musicians. Even if you’re playing your own chords you had to have other people playing with you. That was obvious….
But I just kept it to myself that I really dug them. Everybody else thought they were for the 
teenybopper….But it was obvious to me that they had staying power. I knew they were pointing the direction where music had to go.
28
According to popular music lore, when Dylan toured England in May 1964, two impor-
tant things happened. First, he allegedly turned the Beatles on to marijuana.29 Hallucinogenic 
drugs had an obvious influence on their future musical development, and therefore on the rest 
of popular music. Second, Dylan heard the Animals’ “House of the 
r
ising Sun” before it was re-
leased in the United States. It knocked him out. “My God, ya oughtta hear what’s going down 
over there,” he told a friend. “Eric Burdon, the Animals, ya know? Well, he’s doing House of the Rising Sun in rock. Rock! It’s fuckin’ wild! Blew my mind.”
30 The Animals had, in fact, mined 
Dylan’s first album for their first two recordings, redoing “Baby Let Me Follow You Down” 
as “Baby, Let Me Take You Home” and then transforming “House” into electric, transatlantic 
magic. Dylan appreciated its significance immediately. “You see, there was a lot of hypocrisy all 
around,” he told Scaduto, “people saying it had to be folk or rock. But I knew it didn’t have to be like that.”
31
Folk Rock: Adding Substance to Form
Dylan credited the Animals with concocting the alloy that would yield folk rock, though he 
might have looked to the earlier model of 
r
itchie Valens’s “La Bamba.” Still, it was the Byrds 
who turned it into a full-fledged genre (marketing category). The Animals had come at folk 
material from a rock and blues direction. The Byrds were folkies who, like Dylan, embraced 
rock. Leader Jim (later, 
r
oger) McGuinn had arrived in Los Angeles through the Chicago folk 
circuit; guitarist and vocalist David Crosby was a California-bred folk singer; Chris Hillman picked up the electric bass after laying down his bluegrass mandolin. Together, they evolved a self-conscious sound (defined by McGuinn’s electric twelve-string 
r
ickenbacker) based in a 
170  ro CKI n’ o UTrock aesthetic. Like Dylan’s n ewport 1965 debacle, the Byrds’ sonic conception challenged a 
number of orthodoxies, as Lillian 
r
oxon has pointed out:
Until the Byrds, the very notion of a group of folk singers strengthening their sound with rock 
devices was unthinkable. Folk was highminded, pure and untouched by sordid commercial values. Rock was something you played for a quick buck. The most important thing the Byrds ever did was to recognize that rock could revitalize folk—with a finished product that was considerably 
more than the sum of its parts.
32
At the beginning of their career, the Byrds drank heavily from the well of Dylan’s cre-
ativity, recording rock versions of four of his songs on their first album. When the group’s 
version of “Mr. Tambourine Man,” the title song from their debut album, became a number one 
pop hit in 1965, folk rock became a “thing.” The Lovin’ Spoonful (“Do You Believe in Magic”), 
Barry McGuire (“Eve of Destruction”), Sonny and Cher (“I Got You Babe”), and Simon and Garfunkel (“Sounds of Silence”) all debuted in 1965. Donovan also came into his own that year with “Sunshine Superman.” The Turtles’ rendering of Dylan’s “It Ain’t Me Babe” quickly fol-lowed the Byrds’ “Tambourine Man” up the charts. Cher even offered Dylan to the teenybop-pers in 1965 with her version of “ All I 
r
eally Want to Do,” which was also a hit for the Byrds 
that year.
After 1965, the electrification of folk in the rock market was more or less taken for 
granted. Almost everyone understood that, in the mainstream market, the social consciousness 
that folk brought to the table would be folded into a commercialized 
rock aesthetic, not the other way around. Lillian 
r
oxon correctly 
chastised Newsweek for referring to the Byrds as “Dylanized Beatles 
when the whole point was that they were Beatlized Dylans.”33 In the 
marriage of folk and rock, rock was in control, with all the contra-
dictions that such a statement implied.
At the time, folk rockers were usually considered to be “thinking musicians,” which was 
considered a contradiction in terms in the rock market until the Beatles. Certainly topical 
songs had existed in rock ‘n’ roll—from Chuck Berry’s “Brown-Eyed Handsome Man” to the Crystals’ “Uptown,” rock ‘n’ roll had occasionally flirted with the notion of something more. But folk rock offered a steady diet of such material, be it about personal relationships (“ All I 
r
eally Want to Do”) or social commentary (“Sounds of Silence”). Dylan moved further in the 
direction of the personal with his sprawling 1966 album, Blonde on Blonde , which drew upon 
electric blues, country, and more open-form balladry to present a stirring portrait of an art -
ist who seemed able to shift moods at will. More generally, folk rock pointed the way for the 
singer/songwriters who would go on to capture one strand of the fragmented audience of the 1970s (see Chapter 7), a transition best illustrated by the career of Simon and Garfunkel.
Paul Simon and Art Garfunkel first performed in the late 1950s as Tom and Jerry. Eight 
years later, when their producer Tom Wilson added drums and electric backing to an acoustic recording of “Sounds of Silence” (1965) without their permission, their careers took off. The song shot to number one and established them (now using their real names) as a folk rock act. After racking up five gold or platinum albums and ten Top Thirty singles (including “Mrs. 
r
obinson,” their number one hit from the film The Graduate ), the duo entered the 1970s with Almost everyone understood that, 
in the mainstream market, the social 
consciousness that folk brought to the 
table would be folded into a commer-
cialized rock aesthetic, not the other way around.
 Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 171the moving, if sentimental, social commentary of “Bridge over Troubled Water” from their 
Grammy Award–winning album of the same name. Breaking up shortly after its release, both men segued easily into solo soft rock careers, with Simon eventually leaving his former song 
mate far behind.
In addition to the social consciousness embedded in its songs, folk rock held out the elu-
sive possibility of rock protest. 
r
ock ‘n’ roll’s energy had always been identified with rebels but 
never with a cause. Folk rock leaned toward thoughtful protest and creative opposition, and 
thus brought to a mainstream audience not only folk music’s poetry but also folk’s predomi-nantly left-wing politics. In its earliest and most didactic form, there was Barry McGuire’s raspy “Eve of Destruction” (1965), which rose to the top of the pop charts. Such doomsday fears, however, were met with rejoinders. Within six months, “Ballad of the Green Berets” by Sgt. Barry Sadler, himself a Green Beret, had also risen to the top of the charts.
34 The battle 
lines that would soon separate hippies from hard hats were already being drawn.
o
ddly enough, a good deal of folk rock had an uncommonly sunny disposition, even while 
President Johnson was irrevocably committing U.S. forces to Vietnam. Two groups in particu-lar—the Lovin’ Spoonful and the Mamas and the Papas—offered as large a dose of good old Tin Pan Alley escapism as they did folk protest. John Sebastian, Zal Yanovsky, Cass Elliot, and Dennis Doherty had been the Mugwumps (the name was taken from a group of nineteenth-century liberal reformers). When the group split up after one forgettable LP , Sebastian and 
 
Yanovsky formed the Lovin’ Spoonful and Elliot and Doherty joined John and Michelle Phillips  
to become the Mamas and the Papas. The Mamas and the Papas launched their career in 1966 with the cheerful-sounding “California Dreamin’,” while the Lovin’ Spoonful began in 1965 with two unbelievably lighthearted singles, “Do You Believe in Magic?” and “You Didn’t Have 
to Be So 
n
ice.” Even the respective distrustfulness and cynicism of the Mamas and the Papas’ 
“Monday, Monday” and their “Words of Love” were delivered congenially. About the closest either group came to rock grittiness was the Spoonful’s “Summer in the City” (1966), recorded with street sounds and a real jackhammer to give it a convincingly urban sound.
Even groups more given to social commentary sounded fairly lighthearted. Compare, 
for example, the Byrds’ “Chimes of Freedom” with Dylan’s original. Dylan’s half-spoken/half-sung delivery, with sparse acoustic accompaniment, sounds almost ominous when contrasted with the brightness of McGuinn’s electric twelve string and the Byrds’ upbeat falsetto harmo-nies. For all its folkiness, folk rock never lost sight of the sheer delight of rock entertainment—or perhaps its spirit emanated from those innocent “years of hope,” as Todd Gitlin has said, before they turned to “days of rage.”
35
Black (Music) Is Beautiful
If 1965 was a pivotal year for folk rock, it was even more so for the civil rights movement. 
Sam Cooke’s posthumous tribute to the early phase of that movement, “ A Change Is Gonna Come,” ironically coincided with the assassination of Malcolm X; the passage of the Voting 
r
ights Act; the march from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama, to protest racial discrimination; 
and the Watts rebellion in Los Angeles, signaling an era of urban unrest. The phrase black 
power—promoted by S
n
CC leader Stokely Carmichael (a.k.a. Kwame Ture) the following year 172  ro CKI n’ o UTand invested with new meaning by the Black Panther Party, also founded in 1966—would soon 
occupy a prominent place in the American political lexicon. 
n
ina Simone captured the tenor of 
the times with “Mississippi Goddam” (1964), which foreshadowed the coming militancy, just as 
her “Backlash Blues” (1967) anticipated the reaction to it. This transformation in the tenor of 
the times was reflected in changes in the form, tone, production style, and eventually lyrics of black popular music.
As the themes of black pride and black self-determination gradually supplanted the call 
for integration, Motown’s hegemony over black pop was successfully challenged by a resur-gence of closer-to-the-roots, hard-driving rhythm and blues recorded in the South. Chiefly re-sponsible for the popularization of Southern soul, as this grittier r&b was called, was a highly successful collaboration between Atlantic 
r
ecords and a number of Southern studios, most 
notably Stax-Volt in Memphis, Tennessee, and Fame in Muscle Shoals, Alabama. The fruits 
of this collaboration captured the spirit of the emerging black militancy in tone rather than content. From 1965 on, artists like 
o
tis 
r
edding (“I’ve Been Loving You Too Long”), Wilson 
Pickett (“In the Midnight Hour”), Sam and Dave (“Soul Man”), Arthur Conley (“Sweet Soul Music”), and Percy Sledge (“When a Man Loves a Woman”) were the new chart toppers. Their recordings were raw, basic, almost angry, and much less “produced” than the cleaner, brighter Motown sound.
Stax-Volt, Motown’s chief competitor, was founded around 1960, about the same time as 
Motown. It was as open and disorganized as Motown was opaque and tightly controlled. 
o
rigi-
nally, Stax was a white-owned company, named after its founders, Jim Stewart and Estelle Axton. 
With integrated units like Booker T. and the MGs and the Memphis Horns as session musicians, creative functions were as likely to be handled by whites as by blacks. The “Memphis sound” that 
these musicians spawned was almost invariably the product of cross-racial teamwork. Initially, 
the credits on all Stax recordings read simply: “produced by the Stax staff.” While Motown, a haven for black talent, is remembered by 
n
elson George as being “totally committed to reaching 
white audiences,” Stax aimed its recordings “at r&b fans first, the pop market second.”36
In many ways, the simplicity of Southern soul production gave the 
music its claim to authenticity. Motown’s lavish multitrack pop record-
ings seemed out of sync with the black-pride search for African roots. 
Even though the Stax studio was equipped with a four-track stereo 
recording unit in the mid-1960s by producer Tom Dowd, the label con-
tinued to pursue a more straightforward approach to making records until the end of the 1960s.37 
Commenting on the difference in style between Stax-Volt and Motown, 
o
tis 
r
edding said:
Motown does a lot of overdubbing. It’s mechanically done. At Stax the rule is: whatever you feel, 
play it. We cut together, horns, rhythms, and vocal. We’ll do it three or four times and listen to the results and pick the best one. If somebody doesn’t like a line in the song we’ll go back and cut the whole song over. Until last year [1967], we didn’t even have a four track tape recorder. You can’t 
overdub on a one track machine.
38
Ironically, this largely integrated effort came to signify black power at its most militant. 
Southern soul crossed over to the pop market because black pride had created a cultural space 
in which unrefined r&b could find mainstream acceptance on its own terms.Southern soul crossed over to the pop 
market because black pride had cre-
ated a cultural space in which unrefined 
r&b could find mainstream acceptance 
on its own terms.
 Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 173Between 1965 and 1967, the Stax roster grew from a dozen or so acts to about 100, 
with a concomitant expansion in sales. A good deal of the credit for sales growth has to go to 
Al Bell, a former deejay and Stax’s first black executive. Hired as head of sales in 1965, Bell 
opened promotional doors Stax did not know existed. In his outgoing, flamboyant style, he was 
the perfect foil to Jim Stewart’s inherent conservatism. “To most of the blacks in the company,” music historian Peter Guralnick has said, “ Al Bell was a kind of secret hero, the ‘Jesse Jackson’ of in-house politics.”
39 The internal tensions that would eventually prove to be Stax’s undoing 
were not apparent in 1966 when Al Bell toted up sales of 8 million records.
o
f the many artists who passed through Stax on their way to fame, Wilson Pickett is 
perhaps most illustrative of the magic of Stax’s marriage with Atlantic 
r
ecords. Signed to 
Atlantic in the early 1960s, Pickett was sent by producer Jerry Wexler to Memphis to record with Booker T. and the MGs. The results were immediate. “In the Midnight Hour” (co-written in typical cross-racial Stax fashion by Pickett and guitarist Steve Cropper) went to number one on the r&b charts in 1965 and also achieved significant crossover to the pop market. When relations between Atlantic and Stax became strained in 1966, Wexler simply sent Pickett over to Fame studios in Muscle Shoals, with the same results. 
o
ver the next few years, Pickett 
tallied a couple of dozen more pop hits, reaching the Top Ten with “Land of 1000 Dances” in 1966 and “Funky Broadway” in 1967. The coarse grain of Pickett’s voice and the rhythmic 
insistence of his music signified the forcefulness of the new black militancy, but it would be left to others to combine Southern soul’s passion with explicit social consciousness.
Aretha Franklin did just that. After floundering at Columbia for years, she was signed 
to Atlantic in January 1967 by Jerry Wexler and taken immediately to Muscle Shoals, where, after one legend-ary session, she found her sound. The resulting single, “I 
n
ever Loved a Man (The Way I Love You),” became 
her first of many Top Ten releases for Atlantic. Later that year, her version of 
o
tis 
r
edding’s signature tune 
“
r
espect” went straight to number one and was in-
stantly “transformed from a demand for conjugal rights 
into a soaring cry of freedom.”40 Shortly thereafter, she 
was crowned Lady Soul. Aretha herself projected a 
presence that embodied the slogan “black is beautiful.” 
The vocal and emotional range of her early Atlantic re-
leases (“Baby, I Love You,” “
n
atural Woman,” “Chain of 
Fools,” and “Think,” to name a few) express the fervor of the era dramatically. As Hettie Jones once remarked,
Aretha Franklin earned the title “Lady Soul” as she took the 
fusion of gospel and r&b to new heights. Her music was as powerful and uplifting as the civil rights movement at its 
best.
174  ro CKI n’ o UTAretha did not pray like Mahalia for the endurance to make it on through, nor make you believe 
her pain as Billie Holiday had. The statement black artists wished to make had changed, the blues had been transfigured by anger and pride. Aretha’s music was a celebration, she was “earth-
mother” exhorting, preacher woman denouncing, militant demanding, forgotten woman wailing. 
She was black, she was beautiful, and she was the best. Someone called that time in 1967 the sum-mer of “Retha, Rap, and revolt.”
41
An even more dramatic parallel to the trajectory of black politics can be found in the ca-
reer of another Southern soul artist—James Brown. In the 1950s, Brown was an ambitious and 
headstrong r&b artist whose music was intended for, and in many ways confined to, the black 
audience. His first Top Ten crossover single was in 1965, “Papa’s Got a Brand 
n
ew Bag”; by 
1968, he was Soul Brother 
n
o. 1. His progress came from the strength of his music, but also 
from the way in which he presented a model of self-determination for his African American 
audience. He explained in his autobiography, “I wasn’t content to be a performer and be used 
by other people; I wanted to be a complete show business person: artist, businessman, entre-preneur. It was important to be because people of my origin hadn’t been allowed to get into the business end of show business before, just the show part.”
42 Brown established his own music 
publishing company, had his own imprint with the King record label, and ran his band like a 
well-oiled machine, never leaving any question as to who was in control.
When Brown came to the attention of the white audience, he did so without compromise. 
His string of Top Ten pop hits (“I Got You,” “It’s a Man’s Man’s Man’s World,” “Cold Sweat,” 
“I Got the Feelin’”) made fewer concessions to mainstream sensibilities than any music in the pop market. Critic 
r
obert Palmer has described it as follows:
With no chord changes and precious little melodic variety to sustain listener interest, rhythm 
became everything. Brown and his musicians and arrangers began to treat every instrument and voice in the group as if each were a drum. The horns played single-note bursts that were often sprung against the downbeats. The bass lines were broken up into choppy two- or three-note patterns, a procedure common in Latin music but rare in r&b. Brown’s rhythm guitarist choked his guitar strings against the instrument’s neck so hard that his playing began to sound like a jagged tin can being scraped with a pocketknife. Only occasionally were the horns, organ or backing vocalists allowed to provide a harmonic continuum by holding a chord.
43HEAR  MORE
“Respect” on 
MySearchLab
James Brown’s performances were unparalleled 
and got him billing as “the hardest working man in show business.” By the late 1960s, his stripped-
down, rhythmically charged proto-funk echoed the 
forcefulness of the black power movement.
 Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 175In taking every instrument to the limit of its rhythmic capabili-
ties, Brown carried the Africanization of popular music to its logical ex-
treme, and strongly echoed the cultural nationalism developing in some 
segments of the African American community. If, by chance, a listener 
missed the political significance of Brown’s music, it became explicit in the lyrics of his 1968 hit single, “Say It Loud—I’m Black and I’m Proud,” which became an anthem in the struggle for black liberation.
Latino Rock ‘n’ Roll: From the Southwest to the Spanish Caribbean
Latinos were among those groups whose popular music practices were profoundly affected by 
political currents in the United States. The two populations discussed in Chapter 4—Chicanos in the Southwest (especially Los Angeles) and Puerto 
r
icans in the 
n
ortheast (mostly in 
n
ew 
York City)—continued to define the terms of Latino engagement with rock and soul styles into 
the 1960s and early 1970s.
Because most early Puerto 
r
ican migrants came from Afro-Caribbean backgrounds, when 
they moved beyond their own ethnic enclave, they were more likely to gravitate toward African American culture than to engage directly with the mainstream. Indeed, until the 1960s, Spanish Caribbean sounds defined such a vibrant Latin music scene in the United States that Puerto 
r
i-
can musicians seldom had to look beyond their own Spanish-speaking subindustry to find gainful employment. Even those who became fully established in the United States still identified with Puerto 
r
ico—in effect, a Spanish-speaking island colony—as their homeland. In contrast, Chi -
canos, who are more likely to be mestizo (of mixed European-Amerindian ancestry), have lived 
for over 150 years in a territory they have historically considered their own, which has conferred on them a greater sense of cultural belonging. When Chicanos have experimented with non-Latino musical forms, in addition to displaying deep affinities with African American culture, they have felt relatively little hesitation in adopting mainstream styles or the English language.
44
Following the success of r itchie Valens and the Champs in the late 1950s, Herb Alpert and 
the Tijuana Brass were so successful in tapping another strand of Mexican music (which they 
popularized as Ameriachi) that Alpert was able to form his own record label with partner Jerry 
Moss—A&M records. 
o
ne of their first big stars was Chris Montez, a protégé of 
r
itchie Valens, 
who had a Top Ten hit with “Let’s Dance” in 1962; he was signed to A&M and scored four more 
Top Forty hits in 1966. Another Chicano act from Los Angeles, Cannibal and the Headhunt-
ers, released the defining arrangement of “Land of 1000 Dances” in 1965, a year before Wilson Pickett had a Top Ten hit with the same song. Among the best-known Chicano rock acts in Los Angeles were the Premiers (“Farmer John,” 1964); the Blendells (“La La La La,” 1964); and the hottest local group of them all, Thee Midnighters, whose “Whittier Boulevard” (1965)—named after Chicanos’ preferred avenue for cruising—bore more than a faint resemblance to the 
r
oll-
ing Stones’ “2120 South Michigan Ave,” which was the address of Chess records.
Dubbed the “East Side Sound” in Los Angeles, Chicano rock also issued from other 
 
locales. A Chicano group from Detroit, ? & the Mysterians (as in Question Mark, rendered 
with the punctuation sign), hit number one with “96 Tears” in 1966. From 1965 to 1967, Sam the Sham & the Pharaohs, from Dallas, Texas, turned out six Top Forty hits, including “Wooly Bully” (1965). However, the craving for British acts overshadowed the impact of this music to In taking every instrument to the limit 
of its rhythmic capabilities, Brown car-
ried the Africanization of popular music 
to its logical extreme, and strongly 
echoed the cultural nationalism devel-oping in some segments of the African American community.
176  ro CKI n’ o UT
James Brown was the most influential African American bandleader 
between Duke Ellington and Prince and, like them, he understood what 
makes great dance music: focus, discipline, and precision. Brown de-
veloped a complex, polyrhythmic ensemble approach in which all instru-
ments—basses and drums, guitars, horns, and vocals—functioned as parts of a percussive whole. His musical approach put ever more attention on the rhythmic “groove,” his show-stopping stage theatrics, and the com-
plex improvised interactions between himself and the band.
Brown’s genius was a particularly minimalist one: He stripped the rhythmic grooves of r&b, blues, and gospel 
down to their barest bones. With a succession of great rhythm sections, including most notably the great bass player 
Bootsy Collins and horn soloist Maceo Parker, Brown developed the layered, double-timed rhythmic interaction that was the basic foundation of funk.
Musical Style Notes
“(I Got You) I Feel Good” has all the elements of soul: the strong backbeat (accent on the second and fourth beats 
of the bar), emotional intensity, the “wailing” call-and-response vocals of gospel, impeccable horn arrangements, and rhythmic drive that just won’t quit. In its percussive bass line, and the way the horns “punctuate” the musical line with 
short, precise phrases, it also foreshadows funk. Brown was a master of vocal “cues”—in other words, vocalizations that 
would cue the stopping and starting of phrases by the instrumentalists. Brown’s cues help the musicians execute these “breaks” with razor-sharp precision:
“So good”—(bomp bomp)
“So good”—(bomp)“I got you”—(bomp-bomp-bomp-bomp-BOMP)
In Brown’s live performances, you can see that many of his wails and screams are accompanied by certain physical 
gestures that serve as further cues for the band. This ensemble precision was a signature part of James Brown’s style.
Musical “Road Map”“(I Got You) I Feel Good”
Artist:
 
James Brown
Music/Lyrics by James Brown
Label:
 
King (1965)Listening Guide 14
timing S Comment S 
0:00–0:20 Song starts with one of Brown’s signature vocal screams: “Wow! I feel good—”
Verse 1Note call and response between voice and horn section at the end of the verse.
0:20–0:40 Verse 2Again, note call and response.
0:40–0:47 Saxophone break (transitional musical phrase leading into bridge)
0:47–0:59 BridgeNote how the instruments stop completely when Brown sings, “My love won’t do me no 
harm—” This cues the next verse.
0:59–1:20 Verse 2 repeats.
Call and response between voice and horn section at the end of the verse. Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 177
Listening Guide 14timing S Comment S 
1:20–1:26 Reprise of saxophone break leading into bridge.
1:26–1:39 Bridge
Instruments stop again at 1:36—“my love can’t do me no harm.”
1:39–1:59 Verse 2 repeats.
1:59–2:19 Verse 1 repeats.
2:19–2:30 Reprise last line twice.Horns play extended line, then stop.
2:30 Brown screams, “Hey!” (This vocalization is Brown cueing the band for the last chord.)
Band hits last chord.178  ro CKI n’ o UTsuch an extent that another rock band influenced by Tex-Mex, the 
Sir Douglas Quintet (“She’s About a Mover,” 1965), led by a white local, Doug Sahm, from San Antonio, Texas, was promoted as a new 
British group.
o
n the East Coast, the trade embargo imposed on Cuba follow-
ing the 
r
evolution of 1959 restricted the flow of Cuba’s rich cultural 
resources. Brazilian bossa nova experienced limited mainstream suc-
cess as Cuban music went into decline. In 1966, the closing of 
n
ew York’s Palladium, the central 
gathering place for fans of Spanish Caribbean music—black, white, and Latino—marked both 
the end of the mambo era and the coming out of boogaloo (bugalú), a transitional Latin/r&b 
hybrid described by 
r
ené Lopez as “the first 
n
uyorican music”45 and by John Storm r oberts 
as “the first, and only, uptown Latin form to use largely English lyrics.”46 Younger musicians 
and fans embraced boogaloo but it was immediately shunned by established Latin musicians 
for being off-clave—the complex 3-against-2 rhythm that underpinned much of Cuban music. 
 
Boogaloo retained the horn-based sound of most Latin music and the full range of Latin percus-
sion but added English (or bilingual) lyrics, electric guitars, trap drums, and the 4/4 rhythms and heavy backbeat characteristic of early rock ‘n’ roll and r&b.
This marriage of Latin music and r&b was announced to the mainstream public in 1966 
with the pop success of Joe Cuba’s “Bang, Bang.” 
o
bvious nods to black culture could be heard 
in the repeated lyric exhortation “cornbread, hog maw, and chitlins.” 
o
ther notable boogaloo  
hits that same year included Pete 
r
odríguez’s “I Like It Like That” and Johnny 
 
Colon’s 
 
“Boogaloo Blues.” The style was anticipated earlier in the decade in Mongo Santamaría’s 
 
“Watermelon Man” and 
r
ay Barretto’s “El Watusi,” both of which “involved an inflection of 
Latin traditions in the direction of African American r&b and soul sounds.”47 Like the watusi 
before it, the boogaloo became the hottest dance craze of 1965–1966. By 1969, however, it 
had all but disappeared, submerged beneath the political currents that swept the Puerto 
r
ican 
community.
By the late 1960s the cultural nationalism that had taken hold in the African American 
community also affected Latinos, albeit in different ways. Chicanos expressed their ethnic con-
sciousness without abandoning the rock and r&b styles that had become so much a part of their music. The VIPs, a group whose sound roamed from the British Invasion to Southern soul, for example, changed their name to the more ethnic-sounding El Chicano in 1969 and added newer material like “Viva Tirado” to their repertoire. For Puerto 
r
ican cultural nation-
alists, authenticity meant a return to clave-based Spanish Caribbean roots. Guitar-based rock became the music of the enemy and salsa came to the fore, reestablishing a cultural continu-
ity with Latin bands of an earlier generation. “Salsa drew on multiple contemporary musical sources…,” Deborah Pacini Hernandez has noted, “but at its core it reinvigorated and cel-ebrated the Spanish Caribbean musical aesthetics that had flourished in 
n
ew York in the 1940s 
and 1950s.”48 Issued primarily by Fania r ecords in n ew York, salsa remained a product of the 
Latino community, with relatively little crossover to the mainstream. The only “
n
uyoricans” 
who crossed over at this time were José Feliciano (“Light My Fire,” 1968), and Tony 
o
rlando 
(“Knock Three Times,” 1970), with scant connection to Latin music of any kind.When Chicanos have experimented 
with non-Latino musical forms, in addi-
tion to displaying deep affinities with 
African American culture, they have 
felt relatively little hesitation in adopt-ing mainstream styles or the English language.
 Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 179
Listening Guide 15Composed by New York–based salsa percussionist Tito Puente, “Oye 
Como Va” is, quite literally, a song about rhythm. Its text celebrates the 
great dances of Afro-Cuban music, and its music is based on a distinctive 
Afro-Cuban “cha-cha” rhythm. “Oye Como Va” was made famous among 
Anglo audiences in this particular 1970 version by Santana, which married a traditional Afro-Cuban percussion section (timbales, congas, guiro) to the slightly “distorted” sound of the Hammond organ and the singing, bent-
note guitar solos of late 1960s rock. In this performance, guitarist and 
bandleader Carlos Santana, the offspring of Mexico-born parents, illustrated that he did not need to invent Latin roots for 
rock music: They had been there all along.
The players on the Abraxas LP were Carlos Santana, guitar and vocals; Rico Reyes, percussion; Mike Carabello, 
percussion and conga; José Chepitó Areas, percussion, conga, and timbales; Michael Shrieve, drums; Alberto Gianquinto, piano; David Brown, bass and guitar; and Gregg Rolie, keyboards and vocals.
Musical Style Notes
“Oye Como Va” is a good example of a piece that is constructed of several repetitive melodic and rhythmic formulas over 
which improvisation can happen. Harmonically, it is simple: Two chords are played over and over again. The complexity lies in the layering of musical elements: Over those two chords, we hear the percussion section playing Latin polyrhythms 
(multiple rhythms layered over each other and played simultaneously), to which are added improvisations by the guitar and 
organ.
The Afro-Cuban rhythm is a very important part of the stylistic footprint of “Oye Como Va.” The beginning consists 
of a vamp (a short musical phrase, usually with a distinct rhythm, that repeats a number of times, sometimes through an 
entire song). The vamp begins right at the introduction. Here’s the rhythm the organ plays:
1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 +
/     /     /     /               /     /
Overlaid with this, you can then hear the distinctive “cha-cha” rhythm in the sheee-yuk-shuk-shuk shee-yuk-shuk-shuk 
sound of the guiro, a grooved percussion instrument played with a stick:
1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 +
/       ///      // /       ///       //
Transitions between musical sections are marked by a short, percussive phrase played in rhythmic unison. This has been indicated in the musical road map as “rhythmic transition.”“Oye Como Va”
Artist:
 
Santana
Music/Lyrics by Tito Puente
Label:
 
Columbia (1970), from 
the LP Abraxas180  ro CKI n’ o UT
Listening Guide 15Musical “Road Map”
timing S Comment S 
0:00–0:06 Hammond organ “vamp”
0:06–0:15 Percussion enters.
Guiro enters at 0:08.
0:15–0:30 Guitar enters, layered over organ, bass, percussion; guitar plays the same phrase four times.
0:30–0:37 Rhythmic transition
(short, percussive phrase played in rhythmic unison)
0:38–0:53 Verse
0:53–0:57 Rhythmic transition
0:57–1:45 Guitar solo (based on opening phrase)
1:45–1:53 Rhythmic introduction “vamp” returns as transitional passage.
1:53–2:08 Volume drops; organ plays repetitive riff; section ends with another unison passage played with 
percussive rhythm, forming transition to organ solo.
02:08–2:48 Hammond organ solo
2:48–3:00 Rhythmic “vamp” (as in introduction)
3:00–3:14 Verse
3:14–3:22 Rhythmic transition
3:22–4:06 Guitar solo
4:06–4:14 Rhythmic transition, ending with vocal “huh!” and final chord. Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 181It fell to a West Coast Chicano rock group to interpret contemporary Spanish Caribbean 
rhythmic sensibilities for the rock audience. Carlos Santana was born in Mexico and migrated 
to San Francisco. He started his band, Santana, as a blues band in 1967. Their self-titled 1969 
debut album rose to number four and included Latin-influenced versions of 
o
latunji’s “Jingo” 
and Willie Bobo’s “Evil Ways.” Their next album, Abraxas (1970), went to number one and 
acquainted the national audience with a Latin rock version of Fleetwood Mac’s “Black Magic 
Woman” and a stunning interpretation of Tito Puente’s “
o
ye Como Va.” Santana’s band was 
a model for other Latin rock groups such as Malo and Azteca, and his ethereal guitar playing 
found a welcome home amid the psychedelic sounds of the counterculture.
Rock and Revolution: The Counterculture
As black power groups like the Black Panthers became more militant, record numbers of white 
youth (as well as some youth of color) began to experiment with alternatives to middle-class life. The counterculture, as this movement was called, was based 
on the rejection of a competitive, achievement-oriented society in 
favor of free-living, free-loving lifestyles and shared communities. Its citizens were called hippies, a play on hipster, a black term from the 1940s and 1950s for urban outsiders. If the Panthers felt that “power comes from the barrel of a gun,” hippies leaned more to-ward nonviolence. Indeed, flower power became the hippie analog to black power. Several philo-sophical tendencies and political developments framed the counterculture: a Christian belief in “loving thy neighbor” and a fascination with Eastern religions and music, the mass availability of reliable birth control (the Pill), and the escalation of the war in Vietnam. 
o
ne unifying ele-
ment was the widespread use of mind-expanding drugs.
By the mid-1960s, drug references could be found (or imagined) most anywhere: the 
Beatles’ “Yellow Submarine” was a submarine-shaped barbiturate known as a “yellow jacket”; 
“Mary” in the Association’s “ Along Comes Mary” was code for marijuana. Still, when the Byrds flew “Eight Miles High” in 1966, none of the radio stations that banned the song thought it referred to an airplane ride. A year later, Jefferson Airplane’s “White 
r
abbit,” which openly re-
ferred to mind-altering pills, and Jimi Hendrix’s “Purple Haze” were both part of the “Journey to the Center of the Mind” (Amboy Dukes, 1968). Underlying these varied references was “the power of psychedelics to release users from this here—from their inherited history and their cultural training,” which made them especially appealing to an adolescent generation seeking a “radical reconfiguration of the relation of their self to the world.”
49
not all the drug songs were in favor of drugs. Paul r evere and the r aiders released the 
first Top Ten antidrug song “Kicks” in 1966, when they were the house band for Dick Clark’s 
television program Where the Action Is. Donovan, whose “Mellow Yellow” (1966) had uninten-
tionally initiated a banana-smoking craze, may have bewildered his fans when he suddenly 
denounced drug use in 1967, although they might have gotten a hint from “Sunshine Superman.” In that same year, the 
r
olling Stones’ “Mother’s Little Helper” criticized middle-class pre-
scription drug abuse. Merle Haggard’s “
o
kie from Muskogee” (1969), a number one country 
The counterculture, as this movement 
was called, was based on the rejection 
of a competitive, achievement-oriented 
society in favor of free-living, free-loving 
lifestyles and shared communities.
182  ro CKI n’ o UThit that crossed over to pop, chided marijuana-smoking hippies for their anti-American values 
while extolling the virtues of “white lightning.” Later, the Stones’ “Sister Morphine” and James Brown’s “King Heroin” would capture the downside of inner-city addictions, a theme taken up 
in the 1980s and 1990s.
Blues on Acid: Psychedelic Rock
The path from psychedelic drugs to psychedelic rock led through a revitalized interest in 
blues-based forms, culminating in the advent of what became known as acid rock. The blues revival had its beginnings in Chicago in the early 1960s, where white teenager Paul Butterfield 
served as the U.S. counterpart to Britain’s Alexis Korner and John Mayall. Butterfield jammed 
with blues greats like Muddy Waters, Howlin’ Wolf, and others, eventually forming his own integrated blues band in 1963 with Mike Bloomfield on guitar. By 1965, 
n
ew York folk-blues 
artists Danny Kalb, Tommy Flanders, Steve Katz, and Al Kooper had followed suit and formed the Blues Project. Both groups recorded reasonably successful LPs. In Los Angeles, Canned Heat began in 1965 but did not get off the ground until “
o
n the 
r
oad Again” hit the Top 
Twenty in 1968. (By then, Butterfield had added horns to his group, thus anticipating Katz and Kooper’s formation of Blood, Sweat, and Tears.)
It was the British group Cream that most effectively married the simplicity of the blues 
to the extravagance of the new rock aesthetic. Cream was the first power trio, bringing to-
gether drummer Ginger Baker, bassist Jack Bruce, and guitarist Eric Clapton, whose blues purism led him to leave the Yardbirds (Jeff Beck replaced him) as the blatantly commercial “For Your Love” (1965) hit number six. Cream provided its members with more room to move than they had ever enjoyed before. In live performance, all three soloed extensively at deafening volumes, displaying impeccable musicianship. The layers of overdubs on the group’s first LP , 
Fresh Cream (1966) added a new dimension to the music, and yet somehow Delta bluesman Skip James’s “I’m So Glad” could still be re-lated to its originator. The group’s second al-bum, Disraeli Gears (1967) yielded a Top Ten 
single, “Sunshine of Your Love.” Wheels of Fire went to number one on the album charts before the group disbanded in 1968.
Clapton’s mounting popularity from the 
time he departed the Yardbirds, to his brief stint playing guitar with John Mayall’s Blues 
Janis Joplin gave her life to rock ‘n’ roll—literally. 
The intensity of her bluesy performances mir-rored the tumultuousness of her life. In the end, 
hers was a flame that burned out all too soon.
 Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 183Breakers (recording one classic 1965 album, Blues Breakers, that prompted the graffiti “Clapton 
is God” to appear throughout London), and into his tenure with Cream signaled a wider devel-
opment of great consequence: the elevation of the electric guitarist to a veritable culture hero. 
The guitar hero took hold in England before taking off in the United States, as indicated by a 
1967 portrait of the “Magnificent Seven” guitarists in the British music weekly Melody Maker  
that placed Clapton at its head, alongside the Who’s Pete Townshend, Jeff Beck, a young Jimmy Page—who replaced Beck in the Yardbirds when he left to pursue a solo career—Steve Winwood of Traffic, and Fleetwood Mac’s Peter Green.
50 Indeed, the only American guitarist on the Melody 
Maker list had to move to England for his career to flourish: Jimi Hendrix, the Seattle-born 
 
African American player who would redefine what the electric guitar could do (and whose career 
will be covered in greater detail shortly in this text).
Another scene that attracted white blues enthusiasts developed in San Francisco. Guitar-
ists and Chicago blues veterans Steve Miller and Mike Bloomfield both relocated to the city. 
Miller’s band, formed in 1967, included fellow Chicagoan Boz Scaggs. Bloomfield teamed up with drummer Buddy Miles to form the Electric Flag in 1967. San Francisco’s most notable white blues artist was not a guitarist, however, but a singer. Janis Joplin, conspicuous as one of the few white female blues singers, came to the city from Port Arthur, Texas. Paired with Big Brother and the Holding Company, Joplin poured everything she had into songs like Big Mama Thornton’s “Ball and Chain” and Irma Franklin’s “Piece of My Heart” (both on 1968’s Cheap 
Thrills). Her intensity in concert and on record marked a decisive shift from the more soft-spoken stylings of the girl group era.
Joplin projected a mix of power and vulnerability that embodied her contradictory stand-
ing as a rare female rock star in a milieu dominated by men. In the words of critic Ellen Willis, “Joplin’s revolt against conventional femininity was brave and imaginative, but it also dove-tailed with a stereotype—the ballsy, one-of-the-guys chick who is a needy vulnerable cream puff underneath—cherished by her legions of hip male fans.”
51 Her lifestyle eventually took its 
toll. Having become a symbol of rebellion for millions of white middle-class youth, she died of 
a heroin overdose in 1970. The following year, her last album Pearl, released posthumously, and 
its hit single “Me and Bobby McGee” rose to the top of the pop charts.
By the mid-1960s, San Francisco was widely acknowledged to be the spiritual Mecca of 
the counterculture. The city gave rise to a thriving, eclectic rock scene, boasting groups such 
as the Charlatans, Country Joe and the Fish, Quicksilver Messenger Service, Moby Grape, Sopwith Camel, Sly and the Family Stone, and, of course, the Jefferson Airplane and the Grate-ful Dead. San Francisco venues—including the Avalon and the Fillmore, managed by Chet Helms and Bill Graham, respectively—set the terms for the presentation of live rock in the late 1960s, and provided the model for similar ballrooms that would arise in various cities across the United States. San Francisco was 
also the site of a burgeoning drug culture, which encouraged ex-perimentation with mind-altering drugs—particularly lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD, or acid). The music that emerged from these psychedelic experiences came to be known, logically enough, as acid rock . Efforts to reproduce these experiences naturally led 
to swirling poster and album cover art and light shows in which HEAR  MORE
Janis Joplin on 
MySearchLab
The music that emerged from these 
psychedelic experiences came to be 
known, logically enough, as acid rock. 
Efforts to reproduce these experiences 
naturally led to swirling poster and al-bum cover art and light shows in which colorful pulsating images became an 
integral part of the live music.
184  ro CKI n’ o UTcolorful pulsating images became an integral part of the live music. Indeed, these extramusi-
cal elements alone were often enough to categorize the music as acid rock, whatever the sound might be.
The Jefferson Airplane was the only San Francisco group to have Top Ten singles in the 
1960s. In 1967, primarily because of the powerful vocals of Grace Slick, “Somebody to Love” 
and “White 
r
abbit” moved into the upper reaches of the pop charts. Even before Slick replaced 
Signe Andersen as lead singer of the group, the Jefferson Airplane was the first San Francisco band to get a major label contract. Still, it was the Grateful Dead—with no Top Ten album or single until 1987—that most embodied the sense of community and spirit of experimentation that defined the counterculture.
The Grateful Dead lived in the Haight-Ashbury district, the heart of the hippie scene. 
Musically, they came from a smorgasbord of influences. Leader Jerry Garcia had played folk 
and bluegrass. 
r
on “Pigpen” McKernan, the son of a white r&b deejay, brought his blues back-
ground to bear in his keyboard and harmonica playing. Bassist Phil Lesh had studied classical music.
52 The group’s sound was rounded out by Bill Kreutzmann on drums, Bob Weir on gui-
tar, and the later addition of eclectic percussionist Mickey Hart. 
o
riginally called the Warlocks, 
the Grateful Dead were part of a larger social circle that included novelist (and former state 
wrestling champion) Ken Kesey and the LSD-evangelizing Merry Pranksters. Together they 
organized a number of public LSD gatherings, chronicled by Tom Wolfe in The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test.
Taking an open-ended approach to group improvisation, and treating the audience as an 
equal part of the show, the Grateful Dead went on to become one of the most experimental and improvisatory bands in rock while continuing to perform “more free concerts than any band in the history of music.”
53 Studio albums like The Grateful Dead (1967) and Anthem of the Sun  
(1968) only hinted at their unique strengths, and as a recording band the Dead hit their stride 
with Live Dead (1969), compiled from two concerts at the Fillmore. While the Grateful Dead 
tried to maintain their integrity throughout their career, the counterculture, like most social 
movements, was vulnerable to cooptation.
Commercializing the Counterculture: Sgt. Pepper  and Monterey Pop
After the first Human Be-In Festival drew 20,000 fans to San Francisco’s Golden Gate Park in 
January 1967, some hip capitalist rock entrepreneurs from Los Angeles booked the Monterey fairgrounds for the weekend of June 16–18 and the Monterey International Pop Festival was 
born. Throughout this period, the Beatles had been in the studio recording the masterpiece 
that would change popular music forever. Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band was released on June 1, 1967, three weeks before the Monterey Pop Festival. Together, these two landmark events ushered in the amorphous call to celebrate peace, love, and good vibes that came to be known as the Summer of Love.
Eight months in the making, Sgt. Pepper epitomized all the creativity (and excesses) of 
the counterculture. As the first concept LP (an album designed as a coherent whole, with each song segueing seamlessly into the next), Sgt. Pepper built on earlier examples like the Beach  Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 185Boys’ Pet Sounds and Bob Dylan’s Blonde and Blonde to establish a new plateau in record pro-
duction. It required hundreds of hours of studio time and utilized special effects so sophis-
ticated the music could not be performed live—and in fact, the Beatles had stopped playing 
concerts a year prior to its release, after setting new standards for the scale of live rock includ-
ing record-breaking appearances at 
n
ew York’s Shea Stadium in 1965 and 1966 that drew over 
50,000 per event.
Certain aspects of Sgt. Pepper had been foreshadowed in the band’s prior albums. 
 
Rubber 
Soul (1965) showed a new level of maturity in Lennon and McCartney’s songwriting  
(even as “
n
owhere Man” hinted at Lennon’s frustration with the group’s lack of political 
engagement). Harrison pioneered the use of the sitar in rock on “
n
orwegian Wood,” intro-
ducing a sound that would become more familiar in the psychedelic era. Producer George Martin, now called the “fifth Beatle,” became an indispensable creative force. Revolver (1966), 
an even more experimental album, continued these trends. “Tomorrow 
n
ever Knows,” the 
track that closed the album, was perhaps the most overtly psychedelic song yet produced by any band—an aural evocation of an LSD trip that made groundbreaking use of repeated tape loops as a structuring device.
54 Both sides of the 1967 single “Penny Lane/Strawberry 
Fields” once again confirmed the Beatles’ studio-centered artistry and prefigured the sound 
of things to come.
But all of these releases merely hinted at the impact that Sgt. Pepper would have as the 
connection between music and psychedelics came to full fruition. It was not just transparent 
drug references like “Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds” or the cannabis plants tucked away on the album cover art; it was in the integrated sonic presentation of the entire album—from the hurdy-gurdy organ effects on “Mr. Kite” to the seemingly interminable decay of the final mesmerizing chord on “ A Day in the Life”—that Sgt. Pepper offered an artful and engaging foray into new musical terrain and represented for many an alternative way of life. Its release, meanwhile, was treated as an event of the highest magnitude—the album was made available for airplay to radio stations a week before it appeared in stores, and stations played it con-
stantly, raising public anticipation to new heights. Almost inevitably, Sgt. Pepper quickly rose to number one, where it remained for fifteen weeks, demonstrating the commercial possibilities of the counterculture and constituting what Greil Marcus called “a small pop explosion in and of itself.”
55
Monterey Pop began as a straight commercial concert until John Phillips of the Mamas 
and the Papas, and his manager Lou Adler, convinced the organizers to turn it into an artist-
run, nonprofit (but still very commercial) event. With a decided West Coast orientation, about 
half of the two dozen or so artists came from Los Angeles (the Byrds, Buffalo Springfield, the 
Mamas and the Papas, Canned Heat, Scott McKenzie) and San Francisco (Jefferson Airplane; Country Joe and the Fish; the Grateful Dead; Big Brother and the Holding Company, which featured Janis Joplin; Quicksilver Messenger Service; Steve Miller). Laura 
n
yro and Simon and 
Garfunkel represented 
n
ew York singer/songwriters. The Animals and the Who advanced 
the British Invasion. (The Beatles had declined an invitation and the Stones couldn’t perform 
because of their recent drug bust.) Even though Smokey 
r
obinson sat on the festival board, 
not a single Motown act materialized, and few black artists were on the program; those who 186  ro CKI n’ o UT
“A Day in the Life” is the grand finale of the Beatles’ celebrated con-
cept album. It turns a narration on the morning paper, a recently viewed 
film, and a morning’s work commute into a surreal vision of the nature of 
daily life. The song’s refrain caused a controversy because of its use of 
drug-related slang (“I’d love to turn you on,” heard at 1:39 and 3:45), and it was initially banned by the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC).
Musical Style Notes
“A Day in the Life” features use of multiple-track recording and tape ma-
nipulation, the use of an orchestra as a key part of the musical composi-tion rather than simple background color, and diverse sections of simple 
musical forms combined into more complex musical structures. It begins as a simple rock ballad, written by John Lennon, 
with acoustic guitar and piano, drums, and Lennon’s solo vocal. At the end of the third verse, we hear the refrain “I’d love to turn you on,” the orchestra enters, and a huge crescendo (increase in volume) begins. In fact, the orchestra had been recorded separately, and this tape was played backward and overlaid on multiple tracks.
At the crescendo’s climax, the orchestra abruptly ends, and Lennon’s lyric reflections are replaced by an up-tempo 
bridge section (written by Paul McCartney, originally as a separate song). Notice the style change: The bridge shows Mc-Cartney’s music-hall influence and sounds more like a show tune than a rock ballad. When he arrives at the words “And I went into a dream,” a transitional dream sequence occurs, featuring a heavily processed reverberant vocal on the syllable “ah” and orchestral accompaniment. Taking advantage of the relatively new technology of stereo recording, producer George Martin also pans the voice from one speaker to another, creating the illusion of movement. This section ends abruptly, transitioning into a reprise of the opening verse’s musical texture and melody and Lennon’s fourth verse. At the 
end of the fourth and final verse and the refrain “I’d love to turn you on,” the backward orchestra passage begins again, increasing in volume until it ends abruptly, followed by the enormous crash of a full-orchestra chord, which fades very slowly to the end of the recording.“A Day in the Life”
Artist:
 
The Beatles
Music/Lyrics by John Lennon and 
Paul McCartney
Label:
 
Parlophone, England; 
Capitol, United States (1967), 
from the LP Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely 
Hearts Club BandListening Guide 16 Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 187
Listening Guide 16Musical “Road Map”
timing S Comment S 
0:00–0:12 Introduction: acoustic guitar, piano, bass
0:12–0:44 Verse 1—the vocalist is John Lennon.
0:44–1:05
1:05–1:11Verse 2—drums are added.Slight melodic variation at the end of verse: “Nobody was really sure … ”
1:11–1:39 Verse 3
1:39–2:16 Infamous tag line “I’d love to turn you on …”Note the tremolo in the pitch of the voice.The sound of the orchestra fades in (see musical style notes above).
Notice that the bass continues its steady beat and does so right into the next section.The backward orchestral track continues and ends abruptly at 2:16, providing a transition to 
the bridge section.
2:16–2:34
2:182:33Bridge section, Verse 1Instrumentation: bass, drums, and pianoThe vocalist is now McCartney.Sound effects: alarm clockSound effects: hurried “panting”
2:35–2:48 Bridge section, Verse 2
2:48–3:18 Musical dream sequence (see musical style notes above)Instrumentation: orchestra added to texture.Vocals are panned (the sound moves from one speaker to another, creating the illusion of 
movement).
End of dream sequence provides transition back to original verse form.
3:18–3:44 Verse 4Instrumentation: bass, drums, guitar, piano, maracasThe vocalist is now Lennon.
3:44–4:21 Reprise of “I’d love to turn you on … ” lyric, with backwards orchestral trackOrchestra rises in pitch and creates large crescendo (increase in volume), then stops abruptly 
at climactic point, followed by …
4:21 The orchestra strikes a huge, full chord, which fades until 5:04.188  ro CKI n’ o UTperformed included Lou r awls, Hugh Masekela, a pumped-up o tis r edding, and an outrageous 
Jimi Hendrix.
Whatever its shortcomings, the Monterey Pop Festival was a 
landmark event. As the first huge rock festival (30,000 in attendance), 
it pointed the way for all others. It was patronized by the “hip-eoisie” of the counterculture and by the elite of the recording industry, both of whom took it extremely seriously. It provided 
o
tis 
r
edding with 
a springboard for crossover success, which ended tragically when he 
died in a plane crash later in the year, just three days after recording “(Sittin’ 
o
n) The Dock 
of the Bay”—his only number one pop single. Janis Joplin was anointed a white blues goddess 
and was promptly signed to a lucrative contract by Clive Davis, president of CBS 
r
ecords. The 
festival propelled the Who into the U.S. mainstream following their blistering performance 
of “My Generation.” From San Francisco, the Grateful Dead and Jefferson Airplane already had contracts with Warner and 
r
CA, respectively, and Vanguard had picked up Country Joe 
and the Fish. Later, Capitol signed both Quicksilver Messenger Service and the Steve Miller Band, reportedly for the then unheard-of sum of $40,000 in advances. Perhaps most important, Monterey Pop made Jimi Hendrix an icon because he took Pete Townshend’s guitar-smashing routine to a whole new level.
An African American virtuoso gui-
tarist from Seattle, Hendrix served as a sideman for Little 
r
ichard and the Isley 
Brothers before branching out on his own in Greenwich Village’s mid-1960s scene. 
Discovered by ex-Animal Chas Chandler, 
who lured him to London and paired him with 
n
oel 
r
edding on bass and Mitch 
Mitchell on drums, Hendrix proceeded to dazzle British audiences with his techni-cal ability and his image. After so many years of white musicians in England and the United States admiring black blues performers, Hendrix appeared like an as-sertion of the “real thing”—although his own approach to the blues was far from Whatever its shortcomings, the 
 
Monterey Pop Festival was a 
 
landmark 
event. It was patronized by the 
 
“hip-eoisie”  
of the counterculture and by the elite 
of the recording industry, both of whom took it extremely seriously. 
Jimi Hendrix and his group, the Jimi Hendrix  
Experience, elevated rock to new highs, as  they married the blues to the psychedelic 
experience. Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 189traditional. His guitar style made unprecedented use of the full, electronic potential of amplifi-
cation, taking common blues elements and adding unpredictable bursts of noise and dissonance  
through his deployment of volume, distortion, and feedback. Pete Townshend recalled the 
 impact that Hendrix had on himself and other British guitarists of the time:
There was a tremendous sense of him choosing to play in the white arena, that he was coming 
along and saying, “You’ve taken this, Eric Clapton, and Mr. Townshend, you think you’re a show-man. This is how we do it. This is how we can do it when we take back what you’ve borrowed, if 
not stolen. I’ve put it back together and this is what it’s all about, and you can’t live without it, can you?” And the terrible truth is that we couldn’t live without it. There was a real vengeance there that we couldn’t live without it.
56
Hendrix’s appearance at Monterey Pop—which came after his first single with the 
 
Experience, “Hey Joe,” hit the British Top Ten—showed the forcefulness that Townshend 
 
described. The guitarist closed his set with a cover of the Troggs’ 1966 “Wild Thing,” during 
which Hendrix flaunted his sexuality, feigned intercourse with his amplifiers, and climactically 
set fire to his guitar in an ultimate gesture of sacrifice. Some observers worried that Hendrix, in playing up his sexuality, conformed too much to white stereotypes; maybe for that reason, his black audience in the United States was always far overshadowed by his white fans. Yet his artistry was never limited to the terms of any predefined image. He moved easily between far-flung psychedelic rock, more straight-ahead blues, and hard-edged soul and funk across his three studio albums (Are You Experienced and Axis: Bold as Love, both 1967, and Electric Ladyland, 1968). He mastered recording techniques through hours spent in his Electric Lady studios. At the time he died unexpectedly from drug complications in 1970, he appeared to be 
moving toward a new level of engagement with jazz and perhaps a new commitment to con-nect with black audiences as well as white.
Monterey Pop both confirmed the counterculture’s creeping commercialization and 
provided a platform for its anti-establishment views, both political and cultural. The festival was, in fact, peppered with artists who had taken anti-establishment stances in their music for some time. David Crosby introduced the Byrds’ “He Was a Friend of Mine,” a song about the Kennedy assassination; he challenged the Warren Commission’s official version of the story
57 
and waxed eloquent about the joys of acid. (Crosby also sat in with Buffalo Springfield, which 
included Stephen Stills, laying the groundwork for the supergroup configurations of Crosby, 
Stills & 
n
ash, and Crosby, Stills, 
n
ash & Young.)58 Earlier in the year, Buffalo Springfield had 
scored a Top Ten hit with “For What It’s Worth (Stop, Hey What’s That Sound),” a Stephen 
Stills song protesting the brutal police treatment of peaceful demonstrators. The Animals’ “We 
Gotta Get 
o
ut of This Place” had already become an anthem protesting the constraints of ur-
ban life. The Who’s “My Generation” emphasized the generation gap.
Lyric content was not the only source of anti-establishment sentiment at the festival. 
o
ne look at a stoned Mama Cass drinking in Janis Joplin with her eyes made it abundantly 
clear that applying the label acid rock to music required little more than music…and acid. In-
deed, throughout the weekend, a range of anti-establishment impulses were on display, bound together by the common thread of psychedelia.HEAR  MORE
Jimi Hendrix on 
MySearchLab190  ro CKI n’ o UTRiding the Storm: Radicals, Riots, and Revolutions
If the Beatles brought out the optimistic, upbeat spirit of the counterculture, the Doors rep-
resented its darker side. Doors leader Jim Morrison embraced madness and terror in both his art and his life. The group—which also included keyboardist 
r
ay Manzarek, guitarist 
r
obby 
Krieger, and drummer John Densmore—took its name from Aldous Huxley’s The Doors of 
 
Perception, a book about the liberating aspects of drug use. After playing rock in underground 
Los Angeles clubs for a while, the group came to the attention of Jac Holzman, who signed them to his Elektra label in 1967. Their self-titled debut LP was an immediate smash, bookended by the hard-rocking “Break on Through (To the 
o
ther Side)” and closing cut “The End,” an 
o
edipal fantasy that ran eleven minutes and forty-one seconds. By the time “Light My Fire” 
rocketed to the top of the charts in 1967, spreads in teenage magazines that cast Morrison as a teen idol were juxtaposed against a dramatic onstage, sex-related bust in 
n
ew Haven, Con -
necticut, and warrants for “lewd and lascivious behavior” in Miami. The Doors’ success spoke 
volumes about 1950s sexual repression coming undone in strange ways.
With five further Top Ten albums, the Doors remained one of rock’s most in-demand 
acts. Even Ed Sullivan felt compelled to book them, a move he regretted when they defied his censors and included a reference to getting “higher” in their performance of “Light My Fire.” 
Sly (center front) and the Family Stone created socially relevant music that crossed the boundar-
ies of r&b, jazz, and psychedelic rock as boldly as the group transcended the divisions of race and gender. It was an ambitious project for the late 1960s, and, for a while, they pulled it off better than 
anyone else. Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 191Morrison’s constant brushes with the law served to bolster the group’s outlaw image, but he 
spun increasingly out of control. In 1971, he left the band for a sabbatical in Paris, where he died on July 3, most probably from a drug-induced heart attack. Three weeks later, the Doors’ 
final hit single, “
r
iders on the Storm,” began its ascent into the Top Twenty.
For many observers, the storm had begun several years earlier. The 1968 Tet 
o
ffensive 
in Vietnam had shattered all hopes of a short war. At home, the war’s unpopularity forced 
 
President Johnson to abandon his reelection campaign. 
o
n April 4, shortly after the Kerner 
Commission on Civil Disorders warned that the country was “moving toward two societies, one 
black, one white—separate and unequal,” Martin Luther King, Jr., was assassinated. His death provoked violent reactions in over 100 American cities. That day, James Brown was scheduled to perform at the Boston Garden. Faced with a potentially uncontrollable outburst of sorrow and rage, the city made arrangements to broadcast the show on public television, which kept 
Boston cool, at least for one evening. 
o
n June 6, 
r
obert Kennedy was murdered as he was 
about to wrap up the Democratic nomination for the presidency. Later that summer, the shock-ing, nationally televised violence at the Democratic Convention in Chicago left the nation pro-foundly shaken. To some, it seemed that revolution was just around the corner.
Artists of all styles and personal backgrounds responded to race-related tensions in their 
own ways. 
r
eleases like “ Abraham, Martin, and John” (1968) by Dion and “Everyday People” by 
Sly and the Family Stone (1969) picked up the “black and white together” theme of the early civil rights movement. The difficulties of interracial relationships were explored in Janis Ian’s “Soci-ety’s Child,” in 1967, and the 
r
ascals had taken antiracist stances even before their 1968 “People 
Got to Be Free,” reportedly refusing a slot on the Ed Sullivan Show when Sullivan refused to book a black opening act. Curtis Mayfield and the Impressions continued a series of socially conscious 
“sermon songs” with “We’re a Winner” and “This Is My Country” in 1968 and “Choice of Colors” 
in 1969. White Detroit proto-punks the MC5 absorbed the perspectives of the Black Panthers and the sounds of black artists as diverse as James Brown, John Lee Hooker and Sun 
r
a to pursue 
a distinctive “politics of noise” heard to stirring effect on their live 1969 debut album, Kick out the Jams.
59 The Temptations’ “Ball of Confusion (That’s What the World Is Today)” (1969) captured 
the bewildering state of the civil rights movement after King’s death. “The civil-rights struggle 
was not dead,” 
n
elson George has written, “but its energy was increasingly scattered. The Black 
Panthers embraced communism. 
r
on Karenga’s U.S. organization advocated an Afrocentric cul-
tural nationalism….Black Power came to mean whatever its user needed it to.”60
In 1971, the movement’s entropy was reflected in popular music. John Lennon’s exhor-
tation “Power to the People” and the Chi-Lites’ “(For God’s Sake) Give More Power to the People” recalled the heyday of the Black Panthers, while Bob Dylan’s “George Jackson”—a 
tribute to the slain black leader—made clear that the radical ele-
ments in the black liberation struggle had already been neutral-ized. The disillusionment of the period was best expressed in Marvin Gaye’s “What’s Goin’ 
o
n” and “Inner City Blues.” At the 
same time, Aretha Franklin’s stirring recording of 
n
ina Simone’s 
“Young, Gifted, and Black” captured the spirit of a community that had weathered a torrent of urban violence and provided the musi-cal capstone for a decade of civil rights struggle.Aretha Franklin’s stirring recording 
of Nina Simone’s “Young, Gifted, and 
Black” captured the spirit of a com-
munity that had weathered a torrent of 
urban violence and provided the musi-cal capstone for a decade of civil rights struggle.
192  ro CKI n’ o UTMeanwhile, the new social and political consciousness found its way into an increasingly 
broad range of concerns, from sexual liberation to fundamental social change. The Beatles’ 
1964 willingness just to “hold your hand” had, by 1967, escalated to the 
r
olling Stones’ open 
call to “spend the night together” (though they agreed to change the lyric to “spend some time 
together” for their appearance on the Ed Sullivan Show). While the sexual revolution was real enough, it did not liberate men and women equally. Many of the Stones’ songs—from “Under My Thumb” to “Honky-Tonk Women”—were downright nasty toward women. Despite the rising women’s consciousness—the 
n
ational 
o
rganization for Women (
no
W) was founded in 
1966—Sandy Posey’s defeatist “Born a Woman” and 
n
ancy Sinatra’s more aggressive “These 
Boots Are Made for Walkin’” were among the few musical signs of women speaking up for themselves. Even when Helen 
r
eddy roared “I Am Woman” in 1972, it was less than ferocious, 
although it was explicitly feminist. Janis Joplin and Grace Slick held out to their listeners the 
possibility of a stronger voice for women, but only Aretha Franklin demanded respect. As a group, women declined on the year-end singles charts from an all-time high of 32 percent in 1963 to 6 percent in 1969.
The call for social change split white youth into two dominant groups: those who fa-
vored a strategy of militant political action and those who favored one of individual con-sciousness raising. For some, revolution was an act of self-development, not the overthrow of one political system by another. The Beatles’ “
r
evolution” (1968)—the flip side of “Hey 
Jude,” the group’s best-selling single—represented a rejection of militant political action in favor of consciousness-raising, which would make everything “all right.” For the slower version on the so-called White Album (1968), Lennon made a significant change: rather than asking to be counted out of potential destruction, he added an overdubbed “in,” such that he 
asked to be counted out and counted in at the same time. Confronted with a real dilemma 
about the value of violent political action, Lennon could only leave the choice up to the lis-tener. After the Beatles broke up, Lennon assumed, in his own way, a more activist stance evi-dent in the bed-ins he staged with Yoko 
o
no to protest the war in Vietnam, and his anthems 
“Give Peace a Chance” and “Power to the People.” Beautifully expressed in “Imagine” (1971) 
with the Plastic 
o
no Band, Lennon’s vision was ultimately utopian. For radical activists, the 
Jefferson Airplane’s “We Can Be Together” (1969), calling together those who were “out-laws” in their country’s eyes, had more appeal.
In the summer of 1968, radical leaders—later dubbed the Chicago Eight after they were 
tried, and acquitted, for inciting a riot—eyed Chicago, the site of the Democratic 
 n
ational 
 
Convention, as the occasion to embarrass the government for its repressive policies at home and abroad. Todd Gitlin recalls thinking of Chicago as a “grand fusion between radical 
 
politics 
and counterculture—drugs, sex, rock ‘n’ roll, smash the State.”61 Antiwar protestors, con-
scientious objectors, student radicals, yippies, and Black Panthers—joined by Phil 
o
chs and 
the MC5—descended on Chicago for the protest. The theme music for the event could have 
been the 
r
olling Stones’ just released “Street Fighting Man” (despite its own disclaimers), if 
most of the Chicago rock stations had not refused to play it. The ensuing “police riot” against 
 
demonstrators, media, and bystanders shocked the nation and further undermined an atomized 
 
Democratic Party, leading to the election of 
r
ichard 
n
ixon. Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 193Chicago 1968 was a watershed event. Some on the left withdrew from politics altogether; 
others became more radicalized. Bitter factionalism came to a head at the 1969 SDS 
n
ational 
Convention. The meeting was already torn by rifts between the Progressive Labor Party and 
the 
r
evolutionary Youth Movement–Weatherman faction. When a Black Panther attending 
the SDS Convention made some sexist remarks about women’s liberation, the voice of femi-
nism rose to a deafening roar. In the end, SDS, the largest and most visionary organization of the 
n
ew Left, was irrevocably shattered.
Woodstock and Altamont: The Highs and the Lows
Just as the Weathermen were gearing up to “bring the war home” during the “days of rage,” 
Woodstock offered—in August 1969—a fleeting pastoral approximation of the countercultural utopia. A short four months later, this vision was wiped away by the events of another concert 
at the Altamont Speedway.
The Woodstock Music and Art Fair took place in August 1969 on Max Yasgur’s 600-acre 
farm in Bethel, 
n
ew York. Despite a solid financial base and considerable advanced planning, 
the festival was a prime example of Murphy’s Law—everything that could possibly go wrong 
did so. The crowd was expected to number 50,000 or so. Seven or eight times that number showed up. 
r
oads were obstructed for miles; there was insufficient food and water, and medical 
and sanitary facilities were lacking. Having to change the site for the festival at the last minute due to local resistance, the organizers—comprised of counterculture entrepreneurs 
 
Michael 
Lang and Artie Kornfeld, and “straight” young venture capitalists John 
r
oberts and Joel  
r
osenman—did not have time to fully prepare the setting. With inadequate fencing around the 
site, they were forced to declare what was meant to be a commercial enterprise a free festival, 
losing hundreds of thousands of dollars in the process.62 And then it began to rain.
For all of this, Woodstock was the counterculture’s finest hour. A spirit of cooperation 
infused the entire event. Three accidental deaths did occur—and three births. Bad acid to be 
avoided was announced from the stage. Wavy Gravy and the Hog Farm Commune offered 
practical guidance and makeshift medical attention and even managed to stretch the food sup-ply to provide “breakfast in bed for 400,000,” as Gravy described it. 
o
n the last day of the fes-
tival, Yasgur was moved to tell “the largest group of people ever assembled in one place” that “you have proven something to the world…that half a million kids can get together and have three days of fun and music and have nothing but  fun and music.” Here, then, was the counter -
culture made real—the spontaneous temporary community later lionized by Abbie Hoffman, one of the Chicago Eight, as the Woodstock 
n
ation.63
Woodstock summed up an era of rock styles as it capped the 
counterculture. Creedence Clearwater 
r
evival and the Band repre-
sented good old American rock ‘n’ roll. Arriving from England, the 
Who began with selections from its groundbreaking rock opera, 
Tommy, and then burst into a memorable performance of “Summer-time Blues.” Ten Years After also represented the second wave of British bands, as did Joe Cocker, whose first LP , With a Little Help SEE MORE
Woodstock documen-
tary on MySearchLab
Here, then, was the counterculture 
made real—the spontaneous temporary  
community later lionized by Abbie 
 
Hoffman, one of the Chicago Eight, 
as the Woodstock Nation. Woodstock summed up an era of rock styles as it capped the counterculture.
194  ro CKI n’ o UTfrom My Friends, had just been released. San Francisco offered the Jefferson Airplane, Country 
Joe and the Fish, and Santana, whose performance of “Soul Sacrifice” earned them a Columbia recording contract. Country Joe and the Fish introduced “I-Feel-Like-I’m-Fixin’-to-Die-
r
ag” 
with a rousing version of the “Fish Cheer.”
The festival also had the expected deficiencies. Aside from Melanie, Grace Slick, and 
 Janis Joplin (none of whom were included in the original film), there was only one other female 
headliner—Joan Baez. Performing “Joe Hill,” a song about the martyred labor organizer, Baez introduced a new generation of rock fans to the music of the labor movement. There were also only three African American acts for three days of morning-to-evening performances—
r
ichie 
Havens, Jimi Hendrix, and Sly and the Family Stone. Havens, a black folkie and as much an anomaly as Hendrix, opened the festival. Asked to stall until the next act was ready, he impro-vised an astonishing version of “Freedom,” a song that captured the ethos of the day. Hendrix’s 
searing performance of “The Star-Spangled Banner,” which replicated the sounds of “bombs  
bursting in air” on the guitar, turned the national anthem into what critic Charles Shaar 
 
Murray called “probably the most complex and powerful work of American art to deal with the Vietnam war and its corrupting, distorting effect on successive generations of the American psyche.”
64
Sly and the Family Stone was the only act with a substantial following in the African 
American community. An interracial ensemble comprised of women and men, the San Fran-
cisco–based group uniquely married funk and rock cultures. Between 1968 and 1971, they 
Among the live shows that launched Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young’s touring career was a well-re-
ceived appearance at Woodstock. Ironically, they were also among the headliners for Altamont, the event that is remembered as the death of the counterculture. Po PULA r M USIC  A n D  Po LITICAL  C ULTU r E 195recorded Top Ten pop hits—“Dance to the Music” (1968), “Everyday People” (1969), “Thank 
You (Falletinme Be Mice Elf Agin)” (1970), and “Family Affair” (1971)—that transcended the confines of established musical styles. Their 1969 album Stand! contained the provocative 
“Don’t Call Me 
n
igger, Whitey.” There’s a Riot Goin’ On (1971) was even more controversial, 
but by this time Sly’s growing militancy was overshadowed by his drug-induced unreliability. 
Following a number of personnel changes, the group slowly disintegrated.
Crosby, Stills & 
n
ash—David Crosby (from the Byrds), Stephen Stills (Buffalo 
 
Springfield), and Graham 
n
ash (the Hollies)—signed with Atlantic in 1968. Their self-titled 
debut album showcased their writing ability, elegant harmonies, penchant for social commen-
tary, and seasoned professionalism. Heralded by critics as the best LP of the year, the album 
 
included the seven-minute single they performed at Woodstock, “Suite: Judy Blue Eyes,” as well 
as “Marrakesh Express” and “Wooden Ships,” written by Crosby, Stills, and Paul Kantner of the 
Jefferson Airplane about the horrors of nuclear war. 
n
eil Young (also from Buffalo Springfield), 
who appeared with the trio at Woodstock, was recruited for their second effort, the number one Déjà Vu (1970)—which included “Woodstock,” a song that Joni Mitchell had written about 
the festival. That year, when the 
n
ational Guard opened fire on antiwar demonstrators at Kent 
State University in 
o
hio, killing four students and wounding nine others, the group responded 
with “
o
hio,” naming 
n
ixon as the guilty party. The single was released within weeks of the 
shooting and quickly became a Top Twenty hit. Crosby, Stills, 
n
ash & Young represented the 
creativity and positive political impulses of the 1960s as well as the commercial potential of topical material.
In the four months between Woodstock and Altamont, it seemed like the apocalypse was 
approaching. Having promised “days of rage,” the Weathermen tore up Chicago’s upscale Gold 
Coast in 
o
ctober. In Washington, D.C., at the Vietnam Moratorium on 
n
ovember 15, Pete 
Seeger led three-quarters of a million antiwar activists in a chorus of John Lennon’s “Give 
Peace a Chance.” 
o
n December 4, Chicago police shot Black Panther Fred Hampton dead in his 
bed. Two days later, there was Altamont.
Altamont was a free concert that the 
r
olling Stones had planned as the climax to 
their 1969 U.S. tour promoting their Let It Bleed album. Held just outside San Francisco, 
the concert was captured in gory detail in a documentary titled Gimme Shelter. There were similarities between Woodstock and Altamont—hundreds of thousands in attendance; inadequate food, water, and toilets; last-minute shifts in sites; traffic jams; equal numbers of deaths and births. Altamont might well have turned into a Woodstock-like miracle save for two key differences. First, the concert was held in an area a fraction of the size of Max Yasgur’s farm. Second, the San Francisco chapter of the Hell’s Angels was hired to do secu-rity for $500 worth of beer.
The concert, originally slated for Golden Gate Park in San 
Francisco, was shifted to the Sears Point 
r
aceway. After all the logistical planning and construc-
tion were completed, final negotiations with the raceway owners broke down. Attorneys quickly negotiated a deal with the Altamont Speedway, which meant that all the logistics had to be redone and all the staging torn down and reassembled. As for the Hell’s Angels, the Stones had used the Altamont might well have turned into 
a Woodstock-like miracle save for two 
key differences. First, the concert was 
held in an area a fraction of the size 
of Max Yasgur’s farm. Second, the San Francisco chapter of the Hell’s Angels was hired to do security for $500 worth 
of beer.
196  ro CKI n’ o UTBritish chapter for security without incident for a free concert in London’s Hyde Park for 300,000 
the previous summer. 
o
n the American front, the Grateful Dead forged an association with the 
Bay Area chapter through their connection with Ken Kesey, who was drawn to the organization’s 
romantic outlaw-biker image. However, the British Hell’s Angels were pale imitations of their 
U.S. counterparts, who came with knives and lead-filled pool cues, which they wielded freely.
From the beginning, the concert was marred by bad drug trips and violence. Instructed 
to keep people off the stage, Hell’s Angels treated the area as a military stronghold. Marty Balin, the Jefferson Airplane’s lead singer, was punched unconscious by a Hell’s Angel during the group’s performance of “Somebody to Love” when Balin was caught between the Angels and some fans who had climbed onto the stage. Stanley Booth, a journalist who traveled with the Stones throughout their 1969 tour, recalled, “I had made up my mind about fighting the Hell’s Angels while one of them had me in the air, and probably, the rest of the people present 
had concluded some time ago that the first man who touched an Angel would surely die.”
65 
The violence continued throughout the day, reaching its apex when a black student, Meredith 
Hunter, was murdered. Hunter, brandishing a pistol, was stabbed several times by an Angel 
and then clubbed to death during the Stones’ performance of “Under My Thumb.” Mick Jagger 
made feeble attempts to calm the crowd, but it was clear who were the real street-fighting men and who were the rock ‘n’ roll pretenders, and it was all captured on film.
66
The violence at Altamont in 1969 reflected the deterioration of political movements and 
served notice of the counterculture’s impending demise. Within months, 
n
ew York City con-
struction workers would attack antiwar activists and hippies in the street with the tacit ap-
proval of the 
n
ixon administration. With hundreds of Panthers already dead or in jail, Bobby 
Seale, having just weathered the Chicago Eight trial, would find himself on trial for murder. In 1970, the U.S. military would bomb Cambodia illegally, and repression of the antiwar move-ment would reach a pinnacle with the killing of student demonstrators at Kent State and, shortly thereafter, at Jackson State in Mississippi. Their deaths would have the same chilling  
effect on direct political action that the deaths of Hendrix and Joplin that year and later 
 
Morrison’s would have on popular music.
If the trajectory of the civil rights movement affected the course of black popular music, its re-
verberations were felt throughout the culture. Other constituencies (radical students, antiwar activists, Latinos and, later, feminists, environmentalists, and gay rights advocates) began to use it as a model for airing their own grievances. It was an era in which rock was infused with the lyric substance of folk music and the insistent rhythms of Southern soul called attention to a more demanding black community. In 1970, Motown made a rare sortie into social commentary when it released Edwin Starr’s “War,” an unambiguous antiwar statement. Starr’s recording and his follow-up hit, “Stop the War” (1971), echoed the sentiments of millions of Americans, while the war continued unabated, even expanding into Cambodia and Laos. An era of enormous potential was coming to an unsettled and troubling end, with a forced decline in urban violence but no al-leviation of its root causes, and a fragmentation of the popular music audience that paralleled the disintegration of the decade’s social movements.
LEARN MORE
Chapter Test on 
MySearchLab  1977
The 1960s rolled into the 1970s, leaving behind a  series 
of unresolved issues. As a result, the 1970s are often viewed as a decade 
of retreat. While it is true that the two great movements of the previous 
decade—the civil rights movement and the antiwar movement—were in 
decline, lasting social and cultural (if not structural) changes did 
occur during the 1970s. Society was not radically transformed in the manner that the New Left wanted, but neither did conservatives reestablish the cultural and political hegemony that they had enjoyed in the early 1950s. There were advances in environmental politics and particularly in the women’s and gay rights movements. The oppression of poor people, people of color, and women would not disappear, but these constituencies would never again be silent or invisible. Finally, the 1970s called into question all traditional notions of masculinity and femininity.
While popular music was used to fuel every impulse, from 
explorations of awakened sexuality and flights of psychedelic fan-
tasy to furious discharges of political spleen, the music industry never lost its footing as an enduring capitalist enterprise. Any internal tensions the industry felt were expressed, predictably, in terms of culture versus commerce, music versus markets—the electric version of the authentic versus commercial debate of the folk revival. The more astute observers of the scene understood that this contradiction had always been inherent in rock ‘n’ roll. “From the start,” Michael Lydon said in 1970, “rock has been commercial in its very essence. . . it was never an art form that just happened to make money, nor a commercial undertaking that sometimes became art. Its art was synonymous with its business.”
1 Popular music was bound to the capitalist interests 
that produced it. Therefore, to understand the trajectory of popular music in the 1970s, it is 
necessary to explore the commercial (and technological) developments that began in the music 
industry in the late 1960s.LEARN MORE
Learning Objectives 
on MySearchLabMusic Versus Markets: 
The Fragmentation  of Pop
While popular music was used to fuel 
every impulse, from explorations of 
awakened sexuality and flights of  
psychedelic fantasy to furious discharges 
of political spleen, the music industry never lost its footing as an enduring capitalist enterprise.
198  rock IN ’ ou TAs popular music in the late 1960s began to incorporate blues, jazz, classical, East  Indian, 
and electronic sounds, the boundaries separating audiences became somewhat murky. The 
technical development of FM rock radio led to short-lived experiments in free-form program-
ming, in which it was not uncommon to hear the Beatles, Stevie Wonder, Janis Joplin, Jimi 
Hendrix, Pink Floyd, and the Grateful Dead on the same radio program nor to find them in the same record collection. All these artists were included in the umbrella category of progressive rock, which presumably distinguished them from less interesting formulaic pop. A few years later, however, as the industry tried to rationalize production, artists would be spread over a number of more discrete, less overlapping audiences. For this reason, Rolling Stone’s Steve Pond remembered the 1970s as a time when rock
became diffuse, scattered and unfocused, fragmenting into little genres whose fans paid less and 
less attention to other little genres. In the Seventies, rock had a hundred different focal points: 
Elton John for popsters; Led Zeppelin for hard rockers; Emerson, Lake and Palmer for the art rockers; Joni Mitchell for the singer/songwriter contingent; David Bowie in the glam rock corner; Stevie Wonder for soul aficionados. Instead of a center, rock had a batch of radio formats.
2
reflecting its capitalistic roots, the music industry moved to a strategy of trying to target fans 
with the most disposable income. Thus, the art of marketing became more and more tied to the 
science of demographics.
The Music Industry: A Sound Investment
By 1973, the music business had become a $2-billion-a-year industry, about as large as the sports and film industries combined. Having learned from their rock ‘n’ roll mistakes, major record companies no longer resisted the creative impulses of offbeat artists or upstart inde-
pendent labels. Instead, they happily signed acts directly, made label deals, entered into joint 
ventures, or contracted for distribution. When the Jefferson Airplane left 
rc
A to set up Grunt 
records, the group looked to its old label for distribution. 
c
apitol contracted with the Beach 
Boys to distribute Brother 
r
ecords. Frank Zappa’s Bizarre label, which was distributed by 
Warner, developed new talent. When Zappa directed Alice 
c
ooper to Warner in the early 
1970s, the company was smart enough to listen, and the outrageous metal ensemble became one of the label’s best-selling acts. Warner also entered into a lucrative distribution deal with 
c
hrysalis, which had Jethro Tull and Procol Harum. At the same time, distribution deals with 
Stax and Philadelphia International provided 
c
BS 
r
ecords with a profitable entree to the soul 
market. What had begun in the late 1960s as a period of political awakening with a cultural 
flourish for the rock ‘n’ roll audience was, for the music industry, a period of commercial expan-sion and corporate consolidation.
Merger Mania
Wall Street soon came to view the music industry as a sound investment, and a period of un-
precedented merger activity ensued—not just large record companies gobbling up smaller ones, but huge conglomerates, unrelated to music, acquiring properties in the music industry. 
 Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 199rcA, c BS, and c apitol-EMI, and their related labels, which had 
long been divisions of multinational electronics firms, simply ex-
panded their holdings. Phillips, the Dutch electronics conglom-
erate, acquired Mercury and MGM. Gulf and Western bought 
Paramount. G
r
T, the tape company, purchased 
c
hess. 
o
mega 
Equities bought 
r
oulette.3
By far the most interesting merger was the one that created 
the Warner 
c
ommunications empire. Warner Brothers 
r
ecords had been a rather lackluster 
label that was created in 1958 as a division of the film company. In 1963, the label bought 
Frank Sinatra’s 
r
eprise label, only to be acquired itself by the smaller Seven Arts film com-
pany in a 1967 deal that also included Atlantic 
r
ecords. Next came entrepreneur Steve 
r
oss, 
who parlayed his 
k
inney 
c
orporation parking lot interests into an entertainment conglomer -
ate that included the Warner–Seven Arts labels and Elektra 
r
ecords, adding David  
Geffen’s Asylum 
r
ecords in 1973. Now reorganized as Warner 
c
ommunications, the corpo-
ration and its affiliated labels represented the Grateful Dead, Aretha Franklin, 
c
ream, Led  
Zeppelin, Deep Purple, Black Sabbath, the Faces, 
c
rosby, Stills & Nash, Neil Young, Arlo 
Guthrie, Gordon Lightfoot, Van Morrison, Joni Mitchell, the Eagles, Jackson Browne, James 
Taylor, 
r
andy Newman, and the Mothers of Invention, and it owned extensive holdings in film 
and television as well as Mad magazine, sixty-three comic books, and a piece of Ms.  magazine.
By 1973–1974, structural realignments had produced a level of concentration in the 
music industry that had not been witnessed since the postwar 1940s. The top four record 
corporations accounted for over 50 percent of all records and tapes sold; 
c
BS and Warner 
c
ommunications alone took in about 40 percent of the total. The industry had also consoli-
dated vertically. In addition to its own labels, recording studios, pressing plants, national distri-bution, and publishing division, 
c
BS, Inc., for example, owned the 
c
olumbia 
r
ecord and Tape 
c
lub, Pacific Stereo and the Discount 
r
ecords chain, Fender Guitars, Leslie Speakers, 
r
hodes 
Pianos, and 
r
ogers Drums. EMI in Great Britain had an analogous set of holdings.
Because of the predominance of electronics corporations in the field, there was a wrin-
kle to this corporate structure that seemed particularly antithetical to the ideology of popular 
music at the time: the unexpected connection between music and the military. Ever since the 
invention of the wireless, electronic communication had developed according to its military applications. “ Audio is a fairly obscure backwater of electronics,” producer Peter Williams has explained. “When people do go out to design a new chip they’re not thinking how many re-cording studios can we sell it to. They’re thinking how many missiles can we stick this in. Most electronic development is highly military.”
4 The connection between music and the military 
was driven home dramatically to 
k
eith 
r
ichards when he discovered that Decca, the Stones’ 
label, had diverted the profits it made from the sale of 
r
olling Stones records to precisely this 
kind of research and development:
We found out, and it wasn’t years till we did, that all the bread we made for Decca was going into 
making little black boxes that go into American Air Force bombers to bomb fucking North Vietnam. 
They took the bread we made for them and put it into the radar section of their business. When we found that out, it blew our minds. That was it. Goddamn, you find you’ve helped to kill God knows how many thousands of people without even knowing it. I’d rather the Mafia than Decca.
5Wall Street soon came to view the  
music industry as a sound investment, 
and a period of unprecedented merger  
activity ensued—not just large record 
companies gobbling up smaller ones, but huge conglomerates, unrelated to music, acquiring properties in the music industry.
200  rock IN ’ ou TIn the headiness of the late 1960s and early 1970s, such connections were not always 
apparent. This was the time when rock became art, when it became progressive, indeed, revo-
lutionary. The industry rose willingly to the challenge of accommodating the new aesthetic.
Expanding the Infrastructure: Counterculture as Commodity
Developments in recording technology had a dramatic impact on the production of music. By the late 1960s and early 1970s, high-fidelity stereo records had become the industry standard (with various tape configurations vying for acceptance) and had increased the public’s desire 
for high-quality sound. In the search for better sound, the two four-track tape machines that 
had been used to record Sgt. Pepper in 1967 were rendered obsolete by the appearance of eight- and sixteen-track studios. Multitrack recording had immediate consequences for the social re -
lations of musical production. No longer was it necessary for musicians to perform together to make a record. Indeed, a single musician could now play all the instruments. 
o
verdubbing, lay-
ering, mixing, and the addition of special effects such as reverb, equalization, and compression removed increasingly important aspects of the creative process from the studio performance and located them in the control room, elevating producers to an artistic status equal to that of the musicians they produced. As a result, the term production in the music industry, as Peter 
Wicke has astutely pointed out, came to have two related but distinct definitions: “the produc-tion of music and the manufacture of records.”
6
By the early 1970s, the major record labels had narrowed their 
focus essentially to the manufacture and sale of records. Almost all of 
the creative aspects of music making were contracted out. “The me-
chanics of a record company are just that—the mechanics,” said Joe 
Smith in 1974.7 on the creative end, record companies were involved 
primarily in talent acquisition, marketing, and promotion. And promote they did. The record 
companies were quick to pick up on the anti-establishment fervor of the late 1960s and early 
1970s in promoting some of the more creative strands of rock that were being labeled progres -
sive rock , a term that resonated nicely with the radical rhetoric of the era. Doing so, they were 
part of the larger process identified by social critic Thomas Frank, through which the “hip” 
values promoted through the counterculture “became central to the way American capitalism understood itself and explained itself to the public.”
8 In 1968, c BS introduced an ad campaign 
that promoted some of its rock acts as “The 
r
evolutionaries.” Advertisements were headlined 
with slogans like “The Man can’t bust our music.” Warner released a compilation long-playing 
record (LP) called The People’s Album, which was largely a repository for its singer/songwriters 
and soft rock acts. The album cover art, however, had lettering intended to look like 
c
hinese 
characters and depicted heroic, banner-waving protesters in Mao jackets, thus suggesting an 
association with the cultural revolution occurring halfway around the world.
The appearance of a whole new industry infrastructure greatly enhanced the promo-
tional power of the record companies. 
o
nce experimentation with psychedelic drugs intro-
duced a new visual dimension to live rock performances, a touring circuit of ballrooms and small clubs opened up to showcase the new progressive rock acts. Taking their cue from pro-moter Bill Graham’s Fillmore Auditorium in San Francisco, clubs like the Electric 
c
ircus in By the early 1970s, the major record  
labels had narrowed their focus essen-
tially to the manufacture and sale of  
records. Almost all of the creative aspects 
of music making were contracted out.
 Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 201New York, the Boston Tea Party, the Electric Factory in Philadelphia, the Grande Ballroom 
in Detroit, and the 
k
inetic Playground in 
c
hicago embellished rock performances with strobe 
effects and undulating, amoeba-like light patterns that pulsated to the beat of the music. The 
psychedelic clubs and ballrooms folded after only a few years, largely because the progressive 
rock market had outgrown such small venues. Established promoters simply moved into arena or stadium-size venues and huge outdoor festivals; advances in sound reinforcement technol -
ogy had opened up the possibility of mass audience events on the scale of Woodstock. By the early 1970s, the Grateful Dead were touring with enough power to provide electricity for a small neighborhood. Traveling with thirty-two tons of equipment, Emerson, Lake & Palmer brought new meaning to the term “power trio.”
A burgeoning rock press and the advent of FM rock radio completed the picture of the 
music industry’s growing infrastructure. As Smokey 
r
obinson at Motown recognized early 
on, the unit of pop production for AM Top Forty was the three-minute single. By the mid-
1960s, this fast-paced format had been perfected by programmer Bill Drake, who taught his “boss jocks” to eliminate “dead air.” However, the format did not readily lend itself to the new lyric substance that the folk revival of the early 1960s had brought to popular music, nor to extended singles or concept LPs like Sgt. Pepper. FM rock radio opened up to accommodate this new musical style.
In the 1960s, two Federal 
c
ommunications 
c
ommission (F
cc
) rulings transformed the 
importance of FM for rock. In 1961, the F
cc
 authorized FM “multiplexing,” a process of 
broadcasting two signals simultaneously on a single channel; this is the process that makes possible a stereo broadcast. The second F
cc
 decision, in 1965, married FM and rock: It ruled 
that FM programming in cities with a population greater than 100,000 had to differ from AM 
programming at least 50 percent of the time. Station owners promptly decided to use FM to 
explore new styles of music. Progressive FM rock began more or less simultaneously on the East and West 
c
oasts around 1967, although a number of college stations had used the format 
even earlier. 
o
ne of its commercial pioneers was “Big Daddy” Tom Donahue, who initiated 
a laid-back, “free form” music show on station 
k
MPX in San Francisco and, within months, 
was programming the whole station. He described the format as one that “embraces the best of today’s rock and roll, folk, traditional and city blues, raga, electronic music, and some jazz and classical selections.”
9 By 1970, there were 668 FM outlets in the u nited States, and a good 
number of them—WB
c
N in Boston, WAB
c
 and WNEW in New York, WBBM in 
c
hicago, 
W
k
N
r
 in Detroit, 
k
SAN in San Francisco, and 
k
MET in Los Angeles, among others—were 
playing rock.
Born of the counterculture, progressive FM rock radio exhibited a unique blend of cul-
ture and politics in its formative stages. Within a few years, the better FM stations even rivaled 
some AM outlets in commercial success, but as soon as they did, they fell victim to the same corporate pressures toward homogenization that affected AM radio. Rolling Stone’s Ben Fong-Torres, who did some moonlighting as a deejay, detailed the process in 1970. The typical FM station, observed Fong-Torres, built not just an audience but a community by playing cuts not heard on AM radio, and more importantly, by treating its audience as more than just a market share. However, as ratings climbed, the audience began to be viewed more in terms of “num-
bers,” and advertisers began to have more influence on programming decisions. 
o
ver time the 202  rock IN ’ ou T“free” approach to programming would give way to more rigidly determined playlists dictated 
by programming managers, and the community became redefined as a “share” of the audience. By that point, FM radio was revealed to be “just another commercial radio station.”
10 What re-
sulted was a new FM format called A
or
 (or, Album-
o
riented 
r
ock)—a name that was meant 
to indicate a difference from the singles-oriented Top Forty format, but that paralleled Top 
Forty in reducing what had been an unpredictable array of artists and styles down to a more 
narrow stream of major label rock acts.11
The rock press followed much the same trajectory. The existing trade magazines—
Billboard, Cash Box, Record World—shared AM radio’s inability to incorporate new develop -
ments in music. Dozens of alternative magazines began appearing around 1966 to fill the void, 
spurred by the new seriousness with which rock was being treated due to the innovations of the  
Beatles, Bob Dylan, and others. Crawdaddy!  in Boston was the proving ground for Jon Landau, 
Peter Guralnick, and Ed Ward. 
r
obert 
c
hristgau, Ellen Willis, and 
r
ichard Goldstein cut their 
journalistic teeth at Cheetah in New York. Most of the alternative rags, such as San Francisco’s  
Mojo-Navigator R&R News, were completely disorganized and folded within months—
 
although Mojo-Navigator co-founder Greg Shaw would go on to publish one of the earliest 
and most influential rock fanzines, Who Put the Bomp. Some, such as the Detroit-based Creem, 
watering hole for Dave Marsh and Lester Bangs, published sporadically but with considerable impact. 
o
n 
o
ctober 18, 1967, Jann Wenner launched the magazine that would outlast them 
all—Rolling Stone. From its very beginnings, it ran counter to the antibusiness culture of rock.
Wenner, whom 
r
obert Draper has described as a driven journalist, an unabashed so-
cial climber, a fawning stargazer, and a ruthless businessman “who cut a multitude of ethical 
corners,” was a Berkeley dropout and rock ‘n’ roll fanatic who found himself immersed in the eruptions of mid-1960s San Francisco.
12 Through the efforts of his friend and mentor, r alph 
Gleason, the San Francisco Chronicle’s music critic, Wenner landed a job as entertainment edi-
tor for the radical Sunday Ramparts . He then joined a group that, by his standards, was tak-
ing an interminably long time to start a counterculture magazine called Straight Arrow. After 
attending a few meetings, Wenner stole the group’s mailing list and started his own maga-zine. 
c
ofounder 
r
alph Gleason christened the magazine Rolling Stone, and it was published 
by Wenner’s own company, which he named Straight Arrow. Gleason, a veteran critic whose advocacy of rock was unusual at the time, gave the magazine legitimacy with both musicians (potential interviewees) and record companies (potential advertisers). Taking both rock and journalism seriously, Wenner attracted a formidable first-generation stable of writers, includ-ing Michael Lydon, Jon Landau, Greil Marcus, Langdon Winner, and Jim Miller.
In the first issue of Rolling Stone (which pictured John Lennon in an army uniform on 
the cover), Wenner told his readers, “Rolling Stone is not just about music, but also about the 
things and attitudes that the music embraces.”
13 This hint of a  
connection to politics seemed to be borne out in 
r
alph Gleason’s 
piece on racism in television and Michael Lydon’s exposé of the 
Monterey Pop Festival, which he criticized as being “done for a 
cost plus songs, not for a song plus costs.”14 Rolling Stone soon 
became required reading in the music industry. At the same 
time, Wenner clearly separated himself from the more radical Rolling Stone soon became required  
reading in the music industry. At the same 
time, Wenner clearly separated himself from 
the more radical political tendencies of his 
generation when he condemned the yippie protest at the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago.
 Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 203political tendencies of his generation when 
he condemned the yippie protest at the 1968 Democratic National 
c
onvention in 
c
hicago 
for “using methods and means as corrupt as 
the political machine it hopes to disrupt” and said, to the outrage of the New Left, “
r
ock 
and roll is the only way in which the vast but formless power of youth is structured, the only way in which it can be defined or inspected.”
15
For the New Left, this kind of mystification of rock was precisely what was wrong with 
the counterculture. As 
r
obert Draper has said,
While the nation buried Martin Luther King, Jr., Rolling Stone published an obituary of. . . 
Frankie Lymon; while America cried for Robert F . Kennedy, Jann Wenner fired bullets at the new Cream album. Rolling Stone responded to the rapid escalation of the Vietnam War with an article showing how soldiers were smoking good weed overseas. Nixon’s election—a brutal blow to the 
counterculture—did not warrant a mention, as the magazine was preoccupied with John Lennon’s foreskin.
16
By the magazine’s fourth anniversary in 1971, Wenner had embraced the term capitalist, trying 
to invest it with a positive spin. “ As long as there are bills to pay, writers who want to earn a living by their craft. . .,” he editorialized, “Rolling Stone will be a capitalistic operation.”
17 After 
all, music had always been Rolling Stone’s primary mission, and Wenner had reasoned early on that, to realize his vision, the magazine would have to be built on a solid economic foundation, 
even if that meant distancing it from the political upheaval that provided its context. What 
mattered to Jann Wenner was the surety that the music he loved was taken seriously and that there was a place for him in the scene.
Creativity and Commerce: Rock as Art
In the new music industry, rock enjoyed a privileged position. Technological and journalistic 
advances had invested it with the status of art. The signal event for this development had been, of course, the 1967 release of the Beatles’ Sgt. Pepper album. With 900 hours of studio 
time required for completion at the then unheard of price of $100,000, Sgt. Pepper became the 
Sistine ceiling of rock and George Martin its Michelangelo. It was, in the modest opinion of guitarist Lenny 
k
aye, “an artistic statement in a music that was never regarded as art before.”18 
Even established academics stood up and took notice. 
r
enowned musicologist Wilfred Mellers 
opined that Sgt. Pepper “marked the turning point when the Beatles stopped being ritual dance 
music and became music to be listened to.”19 clearly, the days when the Beatles, or any other 
rock group, could release six best-selling albums in one year were gone forever. 
r
ock artists 
now labored over every cut, experimenting with new sounds, adding special effects, and over-dubbing to perfection. Warner label head Joe Smith told a story of how the Grateful Dead said 
When Jann Wenner launched Rolling 
Stone, he was responding to the tenor of the times. Although he evidenced little 
tolerance for countercultural inefficiency 
or movement politics, he genuinely sought to develop a serious journalism for the music he loved.
204  rock IN ’ ou Tthey wanted to “record thirty minutes of air in the summertime, when it’s hot and smoggy. 
Thirty minutes of heavy air. Then we could go to the desert and record thirty minutes of clean air. Then mix the two together, get a good sound, and record over it.”
20
The Grateful Dead were not alone in the search for perfec-
tion. As social movements and the counterculture that accompanied them deteriorated in the early 1970s, rock increasingly found ref-
uge in its newly acquired standing as art. If rock-as-counterculture 
had opposed market relations, then rock-as-art hovered above them. This was, of course, a hopelessly contradictory belief, but it echoed the anticommercialism of the period and made musicians central to the creative process. 
c
ritics friendly to the music began to construct 
their own versions of auteur theory in popular music. “The criterion of art in rock,” said Jon Landau, “is the capacity of the musician to create a personal, almost private, universe and to express it fully.”
21
This focus led to a split in critical evaluations of rock. For some it tended to carry rock 
in the direction of European art music, drawing on classical influences, delving into opera, 
exploring the possibilities of orchestration, and stressing the technical aspects of musician-
ship. 
o
thers, reacting against these efforts to “elevate” rock, would foster what philosopher 
Bernard Gendron has called an “authenticist” rock aesthetic, according to which the music was 
to be appreciated not based on some outside system like classical music, but on its own terms.22 
The former attitude was drawn to the more experimental impulses of the Beatles and later, to 
the efforts of mostly British rock bands to expand the terms of rock song form and virtuosity 
under the guise of progressive or “prog rock.” The latter found its ultimate fulfillment in the 
punk movement that would gain force later in the 1970s (and is covered in 
c
hapter 8). In either 
sense, rock was granted the status of art in a way it had not previously enjoyed—a construc-tion laden with extramusical baggage.
In the context of 
u
.S. race relations, rock’s artistic explorations were not simply neutral 
forays into a broader musical terrain; they mirrored the separation of the races that had begun in the late 1960s. “No one who can hear today,” proclaimed Rolling Stone editor 
r
alph Gleason in 
January 1968, “can possibly find any way in which the Beatles imitate Black musicians.”23 In May 
of that year, Gleason extolled the virtues of the San Francisco groups for much the same reason:
One of the most encouraging things about the whole hippie scene and rock music in San Francisco 
which grew out of it is that no one is really trying to be anything other than what he is. The white sons of middle class America who are in this thing are not ashamed of being white. They are the first American musicians, aside from the country and western players, who are not trying to sound 
black.
24
These sentiments were later echoed by Eric c lapton, who built his career covering B. B. 
k
ing guitar licks. “My whole attitude has changed,” said 
c
lapton. “I listen to the same sounds 
and records but with a different ear. I’m no longer trying to play anything but like a white 
man.”25 Such comments devalued the contributions that black artists made, placing them out-
side the definition of progressive music and therefore beneath the critical attention of the rock 
press. Progressive rockers headed off in new artistic directions, relating to black music as a As social movements and the  
counterculture that accompanied  
them deteriorated in the early 1970s, 
rock increasingly found refuge in its 
newly acquired standing as art. If  
rock-as-counterculture had opposed market relations, then rock-as-art  
hovered above them.
 Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 205touchstone of historical significance rather than a continuing source 
of artistic inspiration. By 1971, Motown chronicler Dave Morse was able to observe, rather bitterly, “Black musicians are now implicitly 
regarded as precursors who, having taught the white men all they 
know, must gradually recede into the distance as white progressive music, the simple lessons mastered, advances irresistibly into the future.”
26 Jon Landau argued 
that black music “provides rock with the continuity which allows developments like the rise of 
San Francisco to take place.”27
San Francisco’s psychedelic clubs, of course, were some of the places where rock began 
its advance toward art. When George Hunter formed the 
c
harlatans, one of the progenitors 
of the San Francisco scene, he was studying electronic music and staging “happenings” at San 
Francisco State 
c
ollege. The 
c
harlatans’ good-time electric folk had less of an impact than 
the group’s vintage gold-rush cowboy fashions and innovative poster art, inspired by turn-
of-the-century illustrator Maxfield Parrish. These images found a ready home in the city’s 
psychedelic clubs where designers, sculptors, visual artists, and electronics experts were as important to the “total environment” as the music itself.
A more systematic impetus for combining these elements came from British art schools, 
which had long been a haven for bohemian students who went on to become rock stars. Among the British rock musicians who took this path to stardom have been John Lennon, who attended the Liverpool 
c
ollege of Art; Pete Townshend, 
r
on Wood, and Freddie Mercury, all of whom 
attended Ealing Art 
c
ollege; 
r
ay Davies, who went to London’s Hornsey Art 
c
ollege; Jeff Beck 
and Eric 
c
lapton, who enrolled at Wimbleton 
c
ollege of Art, also in London; and David Bowie, 
who attended St. Martin’s School of Art.28 In their engaging study Art into Pop, Simon Frith and 
Howard Horne noted that British art schools promoted a nineteenth-century 
r
omantic notion 
of (high) art as an autonomous, personal 
statement operating within (and sometimes 
resisting) the shifting demands of capital-ist culture. The schools thus encouraged would-be musicians to bring “into music-making attitudes that could never have been fostered under the pressures of profes-sional entertainment.”
29 Alongside fine arts 
courses, classes in industrial and fashion 
design and photography allowed students to 
investigate image and style within modern 
mass media.Progressive rockers headed off in new 
artistic directions, relating to black  
music as a touchstone of historical 
significance rather than a continuing 
source of artistic inspiration.
The Who were the first pop art band. From 
Union Jack jackets to the use of real radio ads and jingles on record, they pioneered 
the use of popular signs and symbols as an 
artistic statement in rock.
206  rock IN ’ ou TFor those who were interested and talented, rock offered the potential for bringing all of 
these elements together in a single, total experience (and held out the possibility of earning a liv-
ing from it). Pete Townshend, for example, applied what he had learned about theater, poetry, and 
film to the Who’s stage act, treating it as performance art. In this spirit, the Who experimented 
with noise and destroyed instruments and sound systems. According to Who biographer Dave Marsh, the guitar smashing that became a semiregular feature of Townshend’s stage act was in-fluenced by the Austrian artist Gustave Metzke’s “auto-destructive” techniques.
30 Pop artist Peter 
Blake (who designed the Sgt. Pepper cover) played a key role in determining the image of the Who 
(badges, medals, targets, the 
u
nion Jack on Townshend’s jacket), which established the group as 
the first pop art band. The Who’s release of the first rock opera, Tommy, in 1969 placed them in 
an artistic realm that would have been considered a contradiction in terms a few years earlier.
Andy Warhol, perhaps pop art’s most famous practitioner, became directly involved in 
rock through his tutelage of the Velvet 
u
nderground, a group with a discomforting sound that 
would become influential in the void that yielded punk. He saw “commercial art as real art and real art as commercial art.”
31 While his position displayed both disturbing cynicism and consid-
erable insight, it also addressed the needs of the music industry:
By the end of the 1960s LP sleeve designers were roaming across the history of modern art, film 
and fashion as knowingly (and for much the same reason) as advertising agencies—the sleeves, 
like the rock posters and group images, at first glimpse the most obvious sign of a high art presence in rock, were, in fact, designed to sell the product.
32
All told, Warhol created over 50 album covers during his career.
For a time, the move to elevate rock to art was balanced by a sense of humor. When the 
Beatles acknowledged the Mothers of Invention’s Freak Out as one of the inspirations for Sgt. 
Pepper, Frank Zappa returned the favor with a complete send-up of Sgt. Pepper’s cover art on 
an album entitled We’re Only in It for the Money. The Who followed with the tongue-in-cheek 
The Who Sell Out, which simulated a commercial radio broadcast and in-cluded ads and jingles, some made up and some real. As the 1960s turned into the 1970s, however, a new generation of British art rockers brought artistic “seriousness” to full fruition. “It was the abstract chimera of ‘art’ 
surrounding the music of such groups as Yes, Jethro Tull, Genesis, Emerson, Lake & Palmer, and the Moody Blues,” contends Iain 
c
hambers, “that continued to exert a disproportional in -
fluence on the direction and sense of much pop music, distributing judgment and dividing the 
musical field into frequently quite rigid divisions.”33
Art rock emerged at this point as a new marketing category that distinguished these 
groups from other progressive rock acts. There was perhaps a greater tendency to “dignify” 
the music with classical references in Britain, where class distinctions are more sharply felt 
than in the 
u
nited States. The Moody Blues kicked off this trend when the group’s Days of 
Future Past, which was recorded with the London Festival 
o
rchestra, reached number three on 
the charts in 1968. They followed up with six gold LPs in a row. With keyboardist John Lord’s 
Concerto for Group and Orchestra in 1970, recorded at the 
r
oyal Albert Hall, Deep Purple was 
headed in the same direction until guitarist 
r
itchie Blackmore intervened and changed it.
At their worst, musicologist 
r
ob Walser has said, these classical appropriations reeked of 
upper-class pretension. 
o
f such works as Emerson, Lake & Palmer’s rendition of Mussorgsky’s As the 1960s turned into the 
1970s, however, a new generation of 
British art rockers brought artistic 
“seriousness” to full fruition.
 Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 207Pictures at an Exhibition (1972), Walser charged that they “were intended as elevations of public 
taste and expressions of advanced musicianship” motivated by the “unabashedly elitist” effort to raise the artistic level of rock.
34 others have been less sharp in their criticisms. Progressive 
rock historian Edward Macan, for example, suggests that the style “can be understood as a  
forum in which the musicians attempt to forge a dialectical relationship between the high 
culture of their parents and the popular culture that they grew up in.”35 At its best, this music 
did not just encourage listeners to take rock “seriously” but promoted a significant reconfigura-
tion of the relationship between the high and popular arts. And much of it became incredibly 
successful commercially, including Emerson, Lake & Palmer, all of whose albums released in 
the 1970s were certified gold.
Emerson, Lake & Palmer (or ELP) was a supergroup that had drawn its members from 
existing rock bands: keyboardist 
k
eith Emerson from the Nice, an earlier rock/classical fusion 
group, guitarist and bass player Greg Lake from 
k
ing 
c
rimson, drummer 
c
arl Palmer from 
the 
c
razy World of Arthur Brown. Lake’s and Palmer’s blues orientation provided the group 
with a hard rock base, but Emerson was the group’s guiding force. A flamboyant, virtuosic performer, he became one of rock’s first “keyboard heroes” (as opposed to guitar heroes), and his pioneering use of the Moog synthesizer helped to further the instrument’s incorporation 
into the popular music of the era.
36 Like many prog rock groups—including Pink Floyd and 
Genesis—ELP built on the concept album model popularized by Sgt. Pepper, generating works 
such as Tarkus  (1971) and Brain Salad Surgery  (1973) that reached high into the Top Twenty. 
By the second half of the 1970s, however, disco was making more efficient use of the synthesizer, 
and punk had stripped rock down to its bare essentials. Art rock extravagance—such as the seventy-piece orchestra the group had assembled for a 1977 tour—seemed bloated by compari-son. Emerson, Lake & Palmer disbanded in 1979, only to regroup at the end of the next decade.
Emerson, Lake & Palmer were among the groups who felt that there 
was no incompatibility between rock and serious art. Among their  defining characteristics were Keith 
 
Emerson’s use of synthesizers  
and the incorporation of classical influences in their music.
208  rock IN ’ ou T
Art or progressive rock was identified with large musical structures, 
layers of overdubbed sound, experimentation with instrumentation and 
electronic effects, and compositional techniques borrowed from classical 
music. These musical elements were often paired with poetic, philosophi-
cal, weighty, or somewhat surreal lyrics. The English group Yes, with its team of virtuoso players and production wizard Eddie Offord, was a clas-sic English “prog” rock band, and “Roundabout” is a classic example of 
the style.
Musical Style Notes
One of the hallmarks of Yes’s style lay in the group’s collaborative compositional method. The members all contributed 
to compositions and arrangements, which partly accounts for the “sectional” sound of a lot of their music. Yes’s guitarist Steve Howe once noted that another one of the group’s “secret ingredients” was the “intensity of the color,” referring to 
the use of tone and timbre (the quality of the sound) to create vivid sonic effects. This is illustrated beautifully in  
“Roundabout” because the different sections of the piece are marked by changes in tone and timbre as well as rhythm.
Another important aspect of Yes’s style is the focus on multiple layers of beautifully executed harmony vocals, as 
precise in live performance as they were on record. The lyrics to “Roundabout” were written during a drive from Aberdeen 
to Glasgow in Scotland (“Roundabout” is the British name for a traffic circle), and much of the imagery is literally taken 
from the countryside (“mountains come out of the sky”; “in and around the lake,” which happened to be Loch Ness).
Yes’s lineup on the Fragile LP was Jon Anderson, vocals; Steve Howe, guitar and vocals; Chris Squire, bass and 
vocals; Rick Wakeman, keyboards; and Bill Bruford, drums.
Musical “Road Map”
Timing S Commen TS 
0:00–0:07 Introduction: sound effect created by reversing a recording of a grand piano.
0:07 Free-rhythm introduction on guitar, beginning with “harmonics,” created by lightly touching the 
sixth, third, second, and first strings of the acoustic guitar at the twelfth fret.
0:40 Descending acoustic guitar line, providing a transition into the first verse.
0:44 Verse 1—melody A; instruments begin.
0:58 Vocal enters.
1:18–1:44
1:25Verse 2—melody AVocal enters (lyrics begin at 1:25).
Note how additional vocals are layered in.
1:44–2:15 Transitional or bridge verse—melody B
2:15–3:21
2:34Verse 3—melody A
Instrumental beginning is extended in length.Vocal enters.
3:21–4:57
3:40
4:36Instrumental section, featuring a repeating bass and guitar riff over a complex, polyrhythmic 
drum part (several different rhythms being played simultaneously)
Vocals in multiple harmonies are layered over the bass, guitar, and drum riff.Melody A returns, also sung over the bass, guitar, and drum riff.“Roundabout”
Artist:
 
Yes
Music/Lyrics by Jon Anderson and 
Steve Howe
Label:
 
Atlantic (1971), from the 
LP FragileListening Guide 17 Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 209
Listening Guide 17Timing S Commen TS 
4:57–
5:33Return of acoustic guitar introduction, played over a repeated, very fast synthesizer riff; sonic 
texture is much more sparse.
Keyboard riff continues, while vocal enters with truncated version bridge B melody—last vocal 
line cues following instrumental section.
5:50–6:16 Instrumental section: blues-style organ solo, while bass, guitar, and drums play the instrumen-tal lines from the transitional bridge.
6:16–7:05 Another instrumental section; solos traded between organ and guitar.
Instruments cue the return to the verse with a passage that ascends the scale.
7:05–7:25 Verse 1—melody A returns.
7:25–7:53 Transitional or bridge verse—melody B
7:53–8:21 Multiple harmony vocals enter over an acoustic rhythm guitar part, singing “da-da-da” syllables.
The harmonies are layered in two groups: The first sings a simple, repetitive melody; the sec-
ond enters with a short countermelody (the first three notes of “Three Blind Mice”).
8:21–8:29 Return of the descending acoustic guitar line from the end of the song’s introduction, ending on a single chord.210  rock IN ’ ou TAnother art rock group, Yes, had actually begun recording for Atlantic in 1968, before 
Emerson, Lake & Palmer formed. After some personnel changes, they edged into the 
u
.S. 
Top Forty by the time their third LP , The Yes Album , was released. But they didn’t hit their 
stride until keyboardist Tony 
k
aye was replaced by 
r
ick Wakeman, a classically trained pianist 
from the 
r
oyal Academy who emerged as yet another keyboard hero. The next album, Fragile  
(1972), hit the Top Ten and yielded one of the group’s only successful singles of the decade, 
“
r
oundabout.” From Fragile on, every Yes album reached the Top Twenty.
Pink Floyd was more eclectic in its influences than Emerson, Lake & Palmer or Yes. 
From 1965 to 1968, the group was dominated by writer/guitarist Syd Barrett, a 
c
amberwell 
Art School student with an unusual flair for combining kinky imagery with all the psychedelic trappings of San Francisco. “ Arnold Layne,” the group’s debut single about a transvestite, was banned by the British Broadcasting 
c
orporation (BB
c
). By 1968, Barrett had succumbed to 
the psychic perils of LSD experimentation and was replaced by David Gilmour. A Saucerful of 
Secrets, released that year, marked the ascendancy of bassist 
r
oger Waters as the creative center 
of the group. 
u
nder Waters’s leadership, the group eschewed Barrett’s three-minute forays 
into psychedelia in favor of long-winded, spacy sonic voyages often based on a single chord. This tendency earned them equal measures of critical praise as the quintessence of art in rock and out-of-hand dismissal as purveyors of psychedelic muzak. The group reached its zenith in 1973 with the release of Dark Side of the Moon, one of the darkest and best-selling rock albums ever. Some 566 weeks and 10 million copies after its release, the album still registered on the pop charts. During this period, the group began playing “concert halls to audiences as hushed as if they were at a classical event.”
37 They continued in this vein throughout the punk era, 
crowning the decade with The Wall (1979), a number one album that yielded their only number 
one single, the anthemic critique of traditional education, “ Another Brick in the Wall.”
u
ltimately, the canon of art rock that emerged was a social construct. Inclusion in the 
art rock category was linked to art school training, to the appropriation of classical and other 
esoteric resources, even to being British. 
u
sing these criteria, Procol Harum, with its nod to-
ward Bach on “ A Whiter Shade of Pale” in 1967, was an easy entry. Led Zeppelin, despite its broad range of influences, was excluded from the art rock category, in part because hip critics could not find a constructive way of relating to the group’s ultra-macho presentation. 
c
oncept 
LPs and theatrical stage shows of distinct intelligence allowed Genesis to be categorized as art 
rock. Ian Anderson’s spirited flute playing and religious musings propelled Jethro Tull into the category. The release of the Who’s second rock opera, Quadrophenia, was enough to con -
tinue the group’s association with art. 
o
n the other hand, few 
u
.S. groups seemed to meet the 
criteria. Nobody, for example, thought of 
c
hicago as an art rock group, even though several of 
its members had studied in conservatories or had majored in music at college. Perhaps, in the 
eyes of the critics, the group had too many Top Forty hits to be considered serious or perhaps a 
horn-based group sounded too much like jazz, which was a different kind of art.
In fact, a jazz rock, or fusion, category emerged in the early 1970s after Miles Davis’s 
Bitches Brew  (1970) reached number thirty-five on the pop charts. At the time, a gold jazz 
 
album was almost unthinkable. A full-page ad in Rolling Stone boasted: “
c
ritics agree Miles 
Davis has found a new audience. 
o
r is it that 
r
ock has just found Miles Davis.”38 Jazz rockers 
were typically jazz musicians enjoying a brief flirtation with the mainstream audience rather  Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 211than rock musicians who were drawn to jazz influences; jazz rock was almost invariably a re-
pository for black or racially integrated groups, while art rock was more squarely the prov-ince of white men. There was little overlap between the two categories outside of some of the 
more underground areas of the British prog scene, represented by Soft Machine, 
c
aravan, and 
others associated with the so-called 
c
anterbury sound. John McLaughlin, the white British 
guitarist who played on Bitches Brew , reached the mainstream audience with his Mahavishnu 
o
rchestra on Inner Mounting Flame (1971) and Birds of Fire (1973). He also teamed up with  
fellow Sri 
c
hinmoy devotee 
c
arlos Santana for Love Devotion Surrender in 1973. Another  
Davis alumnus, Herbie Hancock, scored with the platinum Headhunters in 1974 and finished the 
decade with three more Top Forty albums.39 While jazz artists like George Benson and c huck 
Mangione achieved mainstream success in the late 1970s, their sound is better described as pop 
jazz rather than jazz rock.
Art rock was also separate from other forms of black music in significant ways. At a 
time when most black music was still built around the hit single, art rock focused on extended compositions and LP suites. Typically, art rockers sold far more albums than singles. Emerson, Lake & Palmer, Yes, Jethro Tull, Pink Floyd, and the Moody Blues routinely tallied Top Ten album entries and gold record certifications, but only one of these groups ever had a Top Ten single in the 1970s (the Moody Blues’ “Nights in White Satin” hit number two in 1972) and only two had a Top Ten single in the 1980s (Pink Floyd and Yes). By the late 1960s, revenues from LPs had surpassed those from singles. By the early 1970s, about 80 percent of the sales dollars—and therefore the lion’s share of promotional budgets—was in albums. Thus, black 
music was marginalized financially.
This financial separation also had an aesthetic/social dimension. Art rock fostered pon-
derous introspection. At its most ethereal, it was called “head” music—a music for the mind. 
 
Nourishment for the body—the “ritual dance music” that drew on ever more distant African resources—was devalued accordingly. In addition to racist homologies suggesting the superiority of European/art/mind over African/entertainment/body, the marginalization of black music pushed stylized partner dancing to the periphery, until it resurfaced with a vengeance during the disco craze. In the interim, it was replaced by the broadly interpretative and highly individualized free-form swirl-ing that sometimes accompanied “journeys to the center of the mind.”
Sweeter Soul Music
In the late 1960s, the music press often decried the commercialism of black popular music 
while praising the artistry of rock, even r&b-based rock. “The soul and 
r
 & B strains of Janis 
Joplin, 
r
od Stewart, Joe 
c
ocker, and Van Morrison were praised,” Iain 
c
hambers has said, 
“while 
r
ay 
c
harles and Aretha Franklin, not to mention the unredeemable Tamla Motown 
stable (with the precise exception of the ‘progressive’ Stevie Wonder), were accused of decay-
ing in the swamps of a commercial jungle.”40 If the music press tended to deprecate black mu-
sic, mainstream radio tended to ignore it entirely. Jerry Wexler, Atlantic’s primary rhythm and 
In addition to racist homologies sug-
gesting the superiority of European/
art/mind over African/entertainment/
body, the marginalization of black music 
pushed stylized partner dancing to the periphery, until it resurfaced with a  vengeance during the disco craze.
212  rock IN ’ ou Tblues producer, has said that, by 1971, radio stations did not want to “burden” their listeners 
“with the sound of breaking glass in Watts or the sirens coming from Detroit, which is what r&b music meant at the time,. . . so they took most of it off the radio.”
41 Hardly above criticism  
itself, Atlantic responded to this situation by changing direction to focus primarily on its 
 
British rock acts, just as its former soul partner, Stax, was about to begin its long and torturous 
descent into bankruptcy.
Wexler’s comment suggests a connection between the decline of rhythm and blues on 
the radio and the political shift that marked the end of the tumultuousness associated with the 
1960s. 
c
ertainly by the early 1970s, the civil rights movement appeared to have run its course, 
and civil rights themes declined in popular music. While War scored with “The World Is a Ghetto” in 1972, by 1973, only the Spinners’ “Ghetto 
c
hild” and Stevie Wonder’s “Living for 
the 
c
ity” were noticeable in the pop singles market. There was a corresponding decline in the 
popularity of Southern soul, the militant-sounding strain of r&b from the Deep South. Arthur 
c
onley, Percy Sledge, and Sam and Dave disappeared from the Top Forty after 1968 and, by 
then, 
o
tis 
r
edding had died. Wilson Pickett lasted until 1972 and then faded from pop view. 
That same year, Ike and Tina Turner had their last Top Ten hit of the decade. Soul music had 
not disappeared completely; instead, outside social forces had altered its character.
As radicalism in the black community was repressed either by the cooptation of key 
leaders or by the more sinister effectiveness of the FBI’s 
c
ounter-Intelligence Program 
(
co
INTELP
ro
) operation, there was a fleeting attempt to embrace black capitalism within 
the music industry as a solution to racism and its attendant ills. The music industry was quite aware of discrimination within its own ranks. At the 1969 convention of the National Association of Television and 
r
adio Announcers (NAT
r
A), Stan Gortikov, then president of 
c
apitol, had 
accused the industry of being “too damn white.”42 Earlier that year, at a conference held by 
the 
r
ecording Industry Association of America (
r
IAA), New York senator Jacob Javits had 
 
expressed the “hope that the industry. . . will move forward. . . by striking a resounding note for 
black capitalism.”43
The flurry of rhetoric and action that ensued over the next few years produced some in-
teresting, if paradoxical, results. Having declined on the singles charts from 34 percent in 1968 
to 24 percent in 1971, artists of color then accounted for an all-time high of 44 percent of the 
best-selling singles in 1972. From just 12 percent on the album charts in 1971, they rebounded 
to 24 percent one year later. During this time, there had been a short-lived and highly contro-versial breakthrough of sorts for African Americans in Hollywood. So-called “blaxploitation” films like Shaft, Superfly, and Troubleman featured soundtracks scored by Isaac Hayes, 
c
urtis 
Mayfield, and Marvin Gaye, respectively. Still, soundtrack albums alone do not account for the 
substantial presence of African Americans on the pop charts in 1972. Two other developments come closer to explaining these increases: the emergence of a number of African American art-ists as album-oriented acts and the popularization of softer soul sounds that would provide one of the building blocks for disco.
If there was a dominant black sound that reflected the seemingly quieter mood of the 
early 1970s, it was Philadelphia (or Philly) soft soul, pioneered by the writer-producer team 
of 
k
enny Gamble and Leon Huff and producer-arranger Thom Bell, who joined forces with  Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 213Sigma Sound Studios. The three men collaborated in the tripartite administration of Mighty 
Three Music, the publishing company they formed. 
c
oming of age in Philadelphia in the early 
1960s, they were no strangers to a predominantly white music scene. Gamble had sessioned 
for Leiber and Stoller in New York and had helped to produce Danny and the Juniors’ “ At the 
Hop.” Back in Philadelphia, he formed the 
r
omeos with Thom Bell on keyboards, and free-
lanced with Huff for Atlantic and other labels. The two scored their first Top Ten hit with the blue-eyed Soul Survivors’ “Expressway to Your Heart” on 
c
rimson. Bell worked at 
c
ameo and 
later moved to Philly Groove with the Delfonics, producing the group’s blockbuster hit, “La La Means I Love You.” Gamble and Huff successfully resuscitated the flagging career of Jerry Butler with a new persona—the Iceman—and smoothed out the rough edges of soul on his “
o
nly the Strong Survive” and “What’s the 
u
se of Breaking 
u
p.” In doing so, they perfected 
the production style that would be described in Rolling Stone as “not as bluesy as the Memphis/
Muscle Shoals stuff, not as pop as Detroit.”44
In a five-year period, Gamble and Huff produced thirty million-selling singles, with 
twenty-two records on the charts in 1968 alone; in 1970, the duo grossed over $1 million. 
Even so, they did not hit their stride until 1971, when they formed Philadelphia International 
r
ecords (PI
r
) and made a distribution deal with 
c
BS 
r
ecords. The deal offered economic self-
sufficiency and was also important to Gamble personally. Gamble was a nationalist with incli-
nations toward Islam. He saw PI
r
 as a platform for pushing messages; therefore, in the words 
of Nelson George, “Gamble and Huff contemplated slavery (the 
o
’Jays’ mini-epic ‘Ship A’Hoy’), 
ecology (‘The Air I Breathe’), spiritual enlightenment (‘Wake 
u
p Everybody’), corruption 
(‘Bad Luck’), and the male-dominated nuclear family (‘Family 
r
eunion’).”45 In the context of the 
increasingly conservative Nixon–Ford era, certain aspects of nation-
alism (economic self-sufficiency, for example) resonated as well with 
Nixon’s call for black capitalism as with the development of a strong 
opposition movement. Ironically, rather than rejuvenating the civil rights movement with a message of black liberation, Gamble and Huff were far more successful at infusing the market with romantic ballads and stylish dance music.
Gamble and Huff ’s two biggest groups—Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes (“If 
You Don’t 
k
now Me by Now,” “The Love I Lost”) and the 
o
’Jays (“Back Stabbers,” “Love 
Train”)—were produced throughout the 1970s with what critic Jim Miller called an “urbane glossiness.”
46 During the same time, Thom Bell drew on his classical training to provide lush 
orchestral arrangements over a polite rhythmic pulse for the Stylistics (“Betcha by Golly, 
Wow,” “You Make Me Feel Brand New”) and the Spinners (“I’ll Be Around,” “
c
ould It Be I’m 
Falling in Love,” “Working My Way Back to You”/“Forgive Me, Girl”). By the mid-1970s, 
MFSB (Mother Father Sister Brother), the massive, integrated house band at Sigma Studios, 
and its backup vocal trio, the Three Degrees, had become hit-makers in their own right. In 1974, their recordings of “TS
o
P (The Sound of Philadelphia)” and “When Will I See You 
Again” were numbers one and two, respectively, on the charts—and the former song gained 
new prominence when it became the theme song for Soul Train, the television show that func-tioned as black pop’s version of American Bandstand . Together, these groups set the standard HEAR MORE
Gamble and Huff on 
MySearchLab
Ironically, rather than rejuvenating the 
civil rights movement with a message of 
black liberation, Gamble and Huff were 
far more successful at infusing the  
market with romantic ballads and  stylish dance music.
214  rock IN ’ ou T
“You Make Me Feel Brand New,” with its lush vocal harmonies, string 
arrangements, smooth production, and relaxed rhythmic feel, is a perfect 
example of Philadelphia soft soul. It was a huge hit for the Stylistics, 
reaching number two on the pop charts in 1974. An important part of the 
Stylistics’ sound was the work of producer Thom Bell, who had also enjoyed great career success producing the Delfonics. The song was written by Linda Creed, a well-known songwriter who worked extensively with Bell.
While an important development in the history of African American 
soul music, Philly soft soul was a style that crossed over into a number of markets. A song like “You Make Me Feel Brand New,” a hit on the pop 
and soul charts, was as likely to be heard on Adult Contemporary radio or found in the Easy Listening section of a record store. The widespread popularity of this particular single can also be illustrated by its frequent use in the early 1970s as a wedding song by couples of all creeds and colors.
Musical Style Notes
The beautifully crafted musical and lyrical structure of “You Make Me Feel Brand New” was a variation on popular songs’  
typical verse-chorus pattern, and it became a model for subsequent ballads. The verse itself is divided into two sections, which 
are marked on the musical road map below as A and B. Each has a different melody and features a different vocalist: Airrion 
Love on the A section and the Stylistics’ lead singer Russell Thompkins, Jr., on the B section and chorus (the other members 
of the group are James Dunn, Herbie Murrell, and James Smith). The instrumental texture is dominated by keyboards (electric and acoustic piano and synthesizers), with the typical Philly soft soul string orchestra layered in at various points.
Musical “Road Map”
Timing S Commen TS 
0:00–0:13 Introduction: synthesizers and keyboards, with sitar-like synth sound
0:13–0:26 At the whoosh of the cymbal, tremolo strings enter.
0:26–0:37
0:37–1:29Entrance of full string orchestraVerse 1, section A, with vocal by Airrion LoveInstrumental texture reduced to just keyboards, bass, synthesizer, basic percussion.
1:29–1:55 Verse 1, section B
Lead vocal switches to Russell Thompkins, Jr.
1:55–2:34 Chorus
(multiple voices in wide harmony; Thompkins’s vocal most prominent)Synth orchestra enters right at the “God Bless You.”
2:34–2:44 Transitional instrumental passage
Note glockenspiel sound at transition.
2:44–3:54 Verse 2, section A
Airrion Love vocalNote that this verse is instrumentally much thicker than verse 1—strings, synthesizer, additional keyboards.
3:54–4:04 Verse 2, section BRussell Thompkins’s vocal
4:04–4:37 Chorus(multiple voices in wide harmony; Thompkins’s vocal most prominent)Synth orchestra continues through chorus.
4:37–4:47 Track fades.“You Make Me Feel  
Brand New”
Artist:
 
Stylistics
Music/Lyrics by Thom Bell and 
Linda Creed
Label:
 
Avco (1973), from the  
LP Rockin’ Roll, BabyListening Guide 18 Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 215in black popular music for the first half of the decade and anticipated one strand of the disco 
craze that was about to erupt.
o
ther artists quickly tuned into the new soft soul sound—in 
c
hicago, the 
c
hi-Lites (“
o
h 
Girl”) and the ever-changing Isley Brothers (“That Lady”). Even Southern soul yielded the 
velvety smooth Al Green (“Let’s Stay Together,” “I’m Still in Love with You”). 
o
ne of the most 
striking features about the soft soul groups is how long many of them had been together. The 
c
hi-Lites had formed in 1961. The Isley Brothers had their first hit in 1959. The Spinners had 
begun in 1957 as Harvey Fuqua’s backup group, the Moonglows, then became the Spinners in 
the early 1960s on Fuqua’s Tri-Phi label; personnel changes and moves to Motown and VIP eventually led to their 1970s configuration and five gold albums on Atlantic. The 
o
’Jays had 
begun in 
c
anton, 
o
hio, as the Triumphs in 1958. The group changed its name in the early 
1960s to honor Eddie 
o
’Jay, the 
c
leveland deejay who showed them the ropes. They had been 
signed by Imperial, Bell, and Minit before recording six gold and three platinum LPs for PI
r
 
in the 1970s.47 The fact that it took so many years for these groups to peak says something 
about their perseverance and about the strength of the forces arrayed against them.
c
learly, the heyday of vintage Motown had ended. The Supremes were performing with-
out Diana 
r
oss; the Miracles, without Smokey 
r
obinson. David 
r
uffin and Eddie 
k
endricks 
had left the Temptations (in 1968 and 1971, respectively). The Marvelettes and Martha and the Vandellas were already groups of the past. After a $22-million lawsuit, Holland-Dozier-Holland, Motown’s top writer/producer team, left the label to form Invictus imprint. The Four Tops followed them to the new label in 1971. Two years later, Gladys 
k
night and the Pips moved to 
Buddah, where they recorded some of their biggest hits, including their only number one single, “Midnight Train to Georgia.”The Spinners started in 1957 as Harvey Fuqua’s backup group, the Moonglows, but didn’t achieve 
major success on their own until the 1970s. In that decade, they straddled the fence between soft soul and disco.
216  rock IN ’ ou TStill, while Motown may have been down, it was not out, thanks to the Jackson 5. Their 
first four releases on the label—“I Want You Back,” “ AB
c
,” “The Love You Save,” and “I’ll Be 
There”—all rose to number one on the pop charts in 1970. Their next two—“Mamma’s Pearl” 
and “Never 
c
an Say Goodbye”—went to number two in 1971. This kind of success with debut 
releases was almost unheard of. From Berry Gordy’s perspective, the success of the Jackson 
5 proved that his upbeat pop orientation still worked; to some critics, however, such releases 
appeared to be a throwback to Motown formula production. For many of the label’s veterans, Gordy’s centralized control constrained artistic expression. Stevie Wonder and Marvin Gaye, two important exceptions to the initial talent drain at Motown, dragged Gordy, kicking and screaming, toward a new point of view.
When he turned twenty-one in 1972, Stevie Wonder demanded the royalty payments 
that Gordy had held in trust for him since he was a child. Wonder spent about $250,000 of 
this money to produce Music of My Mind  (1972), which reintroduced him to the white audi-
ence as a progressive act. Around the same time, he gained control of his own publishing—the first Motown artist to do so. Subsequent progressive albums—Talking Book (1972), Innervisions (1973), Fulfillingness’ First Finale (1974), and Songs in the Key of Life (1976)—all went top five 
and confirmed his position as a crossover star. Gaye spent years trying to convince Gordy to back him as an album artist. He finally succeeded in 1971 when What’s Goin’ On was released; it was followed by Let’s Get It On  (1973). Both albums went Top Ten, and What’s Goin’ On  set 
a new standard for black pop’s engagement with the social issues of the day, Gaye offering a meditative engagement with everything from ecological crisis to inner city decline. Although Motown released smash hit singles by the Jackson 5, the new Temptations, and the solo Diana 
r
oss throughout the 1970s, it was Stevie Wonder and Marvin Gaye who introduced the com-
pany to the financial joys of independent production and album-oriented releases.
o
ther black artists’ album-oriented releases also did well. The multiracial ensemble 
War—initially Eric Burdon’s backup band—released eight albums of their own in the 1970s; four made the Top Ten and all were certified gold or platinum. 
u
nited Artists tried to take 
credit for the group’s success, pointing to the label’s policy of promoting black acts no dif -
ferently from white acts. Jerry Wexler, however, had a different explanation: “The old myth used to be that an r&b record could sell maybe 200,000 copies  
and, in order to get any real muscle  
in sales, [it] had to sell pop (to whites). 
Stevie Wonder began his career as a multitalented  
twelve-year-old musical genius with the prefix “Little”  attached to his name. By the early 1970s, he had  
secured his own publishing rights, successfully challenged 
Motown’s formula mentality, and was well on his way to becoming an international superstar.
 Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 217But now I think millions of sales are possible on ‘secret service’ hits—records that whites may 
not really be familiar with.”48 Whatever the truth, War’s mellow grooves, at once laid-back 
and funky (“Slippin’ into Darkness,” “The 
c
isco 
k
id”), seemed consonant with the tenor of the 
new times.
James Brown adapted to the new political era by singing a new 
political tune. Although a powerful symbol of black pride in the soul 
era, when Brown endorsed Nixon for reelection in 1972, he compro-mised his credibility in the traditionally Democratic black commu-nity. Soul Brother No. 1 became, in the eyes of his detractors, Sold Brother No. 1, despite producing a string of propulsive hits like “Sex Machine” and “Make It Funky” that perfected his rhythm-centered funk approach. He had his last pop hits of the decade in 1974, the year Nixon resigned, and did not return to the Top Forty until the 
film Rocky IV  propelled “Living in America” to number four in 1986. 
Aretha Franklin also faded from pop view. After reaching the Top Ten in 1974 with “
u
ntil You 
c
ome Back to Me (That’s What I’m Gonna Do),” she did not achieve that position again until 
1985 with “Freeway of Love,” a duet with Annie Lennox of Eurythmics.
In the early 1970s, great black popular music was still being produced, but it no longer 
had the insistence of Southern soul. The operatic 
r
oberta Flack hit the number one slot three 
times in three years for Atlantic, with singles as soothing as they were beautiful—“The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face” (1972), “
k
illing Me Softly with His Song” (1973), and “Feel Like 
Makin’ Love” (1974). Her duets with Donny Hathaway were equally delicious. Taking roman-tic sincerity all the way to self-parody, Barry White, backed by his Love 
u
nlimited female trio 
and the forty-piece, string-laden Love 
u
nlimited 
o
rchestra, produced hits such as “I’m Gonna 
Love You Just a Little More Baby” (1973), and “You’re the First, the Last, My Everything” 
(1974), on which he “advanced a more idealized vision of romantic love and a more selfless masculinity than just about anyone else on the scene.”
49 Both Flack and White joined the ranks 
of successful album artists: Flack had eight gold records to her credit; White had five gold and 
two platinum. White’s “lover man” stance had been anticipated by Isaac Hayes’s Hot Buttered 
Soul, released on Stax’s Enterprise label in 1969. Hayes’s eighteen-minute version of “By the 
Time I Get to Phoenix,” with its extended spoken-word introduction of murmured declara-tions of love, made the album the best-selling LP in Stax’s history.
By the start of the 1970s, Stax had become a multimillion-dollar corporation. 
u
nder the 
leadership of Al Bell, the company entered a new period of political engagement, with ties to 
r
ichard Pryor and the 
r
everend Jesse Jackson. A new distribution deal with 
c
BS provided 
the company with $6 million in capital advances. In 1972, the label undertook its most ambi-
tious project, Wattstax, a spectacular benefit concert in Los Angeles to commemorate the 1965 Watts uprising. The concert featured all the Stax stars and resulted in a feature-length film, 
a six-sided album, and almost $100,000 in contributions for black charitable organizations. Without question, the concert underscored the connection between Southern soul and black power; but it also revealed identity problems and political tensions within the company. Why was Stax promoting a benefit in Los Angeles? What had they done for hometown Memphis? As these questions were being raised within the company, the Internal 
r
evenue Service (I
r
S) HEAR MORE
James Brown on 
MySearchLab
James Brown adapted to the new  
political era by singing a new political 
tune. Although a powerful symbol of 
black pride in the soul era, when Brown 
endorsed Nixon for reelection in 1972, he compromised his credibility in  the traditionally Democratic black  
community. Soul Brother No. 1 became, 
in the eyes of his detractors, Sold Brother No. 1.
218  rock IN ’ ou Tlaunched an investigation into the company’s business operations—and of Al Bell in particu-
lar. By the time Bell was cleared of all charges in 1976, Stax had closed its doors. Jim Stewart, Stax’s conservative white founder, defended his partner’s honesty, adding that Bell “got too  
involved in politics and not enough in the record business.”
50 It was clear that the times 
 
demanded a new cultural orientation. Philadelphia provided soft soul sounds; white singer/songwriters provided soft rock.
Singer/Songwriters, Soft Rock, and More
The singer/songwriters of the 1970s wrote songs that were intensely personal—at times in-timate, at times introspective, at times confessional. In the aspirations of rock toward art, they represented an attempt to apply lyric poetry to semi-autobiographical themes. As a trend in 
popular music, they were born of the 1960s and edged toward a break with that same era. In 
them, the introspection of the drug culture manifested itself in a level of self-disclosure that, a decade before, would have been revealed only to a psychiatrist. This turning inward signaled a retreat from—or was it a reevaluation of—the political engagement of the 1960s.
In the radical movements of the 1960s, personal concerns were often treated as psy-
chological inadequacies that got in the way of revolutionary transformation. Eventually, the articulation of the powerfully simple feminist maxim “the personal is political” rendered all such thinking invalid. Now power relations had to be considered at all levels. Vulnerability was no longer a sign of political or psychological weakness; it was an essential ingredient in 
any trusting relationship. For radicals, of course, this maxim posed a dilemma: While personal openness tended toward equalizing power, at least among individuals, it could also undermine revolutionary discipline. In certain circles, such an outcome would have been considered “soft.” And soft was not the stuff that revolutions were made of.
Soft was also not the stuff that rock was about at the turn of the decade. Indeed, until 
the appearance of the singer/songwriters, the words soft and rock would not have appeared in the same sentence. Surprisingly, at a time when most rock was rough, this new music was gen-
tle; while rock sought to let it all hang out, the tone of soft rock was reserved. At the time, hard rock was perceived as male in its aggressive tone and phallocentric connection to instruments; and rock’s preoccupation with “hardness” gave rise to some early 
feminist critiques of the music by writers like Patricia 
k
enneally-
Morrison, who declared in 1970 that, “for all its self-hype to the 
contrary, rock is just another dismal male chauvinist trip, with one important difference: it’s 
got the power and the looseness with which to change itself.”51 Soft rock represented the fe-
male—or, feminine—side of the equation, with mixed results. 
o
n the plus side, soft rock was 
the first style since the advent of rock ‘n’ roll that allowed women to sing in their own voices 
and encouraged men to try on new personas. 
o
n the minus side, its gentleness could sound 
mousy and its self-revelations verged on narcissism.
Singer/songwriter Joni Mitchell captured the vulnerability that defined soft rock. Her 
romantic involvements (with David 
c
rosby, Graham Nash, and James Taylor, among others) 
At the time, hard rock was perceived as 
male in its aggressive tone and phallocen-
tric connection to instruments; and rock’s 
preoccupation with “hardness” gave rise to 
some early feminist critiques.
 Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 219were more widely noted than her music and frequently submerged consideration of her art-
istry. Mitchell bore some responsibility for the situation because she devoted much of her considerable talent—a near three-octave range, intricate melodies and instrumentation, and el-
egant lyrics—to exploring the exquisite pain of her amorous ups and downs. 
o
n her intensely 
personal album, Blue, she combined all these elements. In his review, 
c
hristgau saw evidence of 
feminism at work, even if Mitchell didn’t:
Like her voice, Joni Mitchell’s lyrics have always suggested emotional life with startling highs 
and lows and an attenuated middle. Just because she knows herself, she reveals how dangerous and attractive such a life can be, especially for women. . . . In a male performer such intense self-concern would be an egotistic cop-out. In a woman it is an act of defiance.
Not that Mitchell herself has always perceived it that way.
52
Signed to r eprise in 1967, Mitchell had her first big break in 1968 when Judy c ollins 
scored a Top Ten hit with Mitchell’s “Both Sides Now.” In 1970, she released Ladies of the 
Canyon, which included her anthemic “Woodstock,” a hit for 
c
rosby, Stills, Nash & Young. 
As her career progressed, she moved from acoustic accompaniment to a soft rock band and 
switched to Asylum. While she generated a handful of Top Forty hits—“Big Yellow Taxi,” 
“You Turn Me 
o
n, I’m a 
r
adio,” “Help Me”—she was first and foremost an album artist who 
hit her stride with a striking trio of confessional works including Blue (1971), For the Roses  
(1972), and Court and Spark (1974). After turning out eight gold or platinum LPs in the 1970s, she turned briefly toward jazz, then returned to more accessible material in the 1980s, switch-ing labels to Geffen.
James Taylor was, if anything, more strikingly mellow and self-absorbed than Mitchell—
the antithesis of in-your-face 1960s rockers. To the trained observer, his overly laid-back de-
meanor may have suggested his frequent bouts of depression as a teen or the heroin addiction that marred his career in his early twenties. Following his success, some critics spewed venom. Lester Bangs infamously imagined stabbing Taylor with a broken bottle of 
r
ipple wine. For 
Bangs, the singer-songwriter represented an unfortunate tendency toward “I-
r
ock”—the “I” 
standing for the self, and the self-centered quality that Taylor and his ilk brought to the sing-ing of soft, singer-songwriter rock. Taylor’s exaggerated egocentrism violated Bangs’s “au -
thenticist” belief that rock as an art form existed not to cultivate introspection but to satisfy more immediate pleasures.
53
of course, such responses to Taylor would not have been so virulent had he not become 
so famous. 
o
riginally signed to the Beatles’ Apple label by Peter Asher, his star began to rise 
upon his return to the 
u
nited States with Asher as his manager and Warner as his new label. 
Sweet Baby James  (1970) became one of the defining albums of the soft rock genre and went 
platinum to boot. For the next eleven years, Taylor enjoyed nothing less than gold album sales. 
His 1972 marriage to 
c
arly Simon simply heightened his visibility. Despite Taylor’s skill as a 
songwriter (“Fire and 
r
ain,” “
c
ountry 
r
oad”), most of his hit singles were covers of other art-
ists’ material—
c
arole 
k
ing’s “You’ve Got a Friend” (1971), Marvin Gaye’s “How Sweet It Is 
(To Be Loved by You)” (1975), and Jimmy Jones’s “Handy Man” (1977). Taylor joined Simon and Garfunkel on Sam 
c
ooke’s “What a Wonderful World” and hit number five with 
c
arly 
Simon on 
c
harlie and Inez Foxx’s “Mockingbird” in 1974.220  rock IN ’ ou Tcarly Simon’s career got off to a false start when differences with manager Albert Grossman 
(also Dylan’s manager) scuttled a 1966 
c
olumbia recording session. Signed to Elektra in 1970, 
she hit the Top Thirty with her self-titled debut album in 1971. The LP’s hit single, “That’s 
the Way I’ve Always Heard It Should Be,” hinted at a feminist influence in its exploration of 
the deadening effects of marriage. The following year, her number one single, “You’re So Vain,” 
 
released just after her marriage to James Taylor, prompted endless  
queries about whether Mick Jagger (who sang backup vocals) or 
 
Warren Beatty (a rumored earlier affair) was the subject of the song. Having entered rock aristocracy, Simon projected an independence that was more a function of economic privilege—she was an heir to the Simon and Schuster publishing empire—than political choice.
c
arole 
k
ing was neither consumed by politics nor driven to share the intimate details 
of her private life. And she never tried to become either “one of the boys” or a sex kitten. She 
seemed at home with herself—forthright, genuine, and content. She wrote with a personal 
touch, sang in a conversational tone, and in 1971 outsold everyone in the music business. 
k
ing 
had been in the business much longer than most of her contemporaries. By 1961, before she 
was out of her teens, she and Gerry Goffin, her lyricist husband, were already collecting roy-alties on their first major hit, the Shirelles’ “Will You Love Me Tomorrow.” In 1962, she had her own pop hit as a solo vocalist, “It Might as Well 
r
ain until September.” After divorcing 
Goffin, she and their two daughters moved to the West 
c
oast, where she continued to write 
songs. A contract with Lou Adler’s 
o
de 
r
ecords launched her career as a full-fledged singer/
songwriter. Her first outing, Carole King: Writer (1970), failed to crack the Top Forty, but her second, Tapestry (1971), broke all existing records.
Artistically, all the elements of 
 
Tapestry  worked in synergy—
k
ing’s 
 
genius as a songwriter, the understated sensuality of her lightly r&b-inflected piano playing, the warm and friendly voice you could believe in. Another key ingredient  
was Adler’s uncluttered production. 
 
Tapestry “was a very naked sounding 
 
album,” Adler said. “I wanted it to sound like she was in the room playing piano for you.”
54 In its first year, Tapestry ended 
up in 5 million homes. It remained in the HEAR MORE
Carole King on 
MySearchLabHaving entered rock aristocracy,  
Simon projected an independence  
that was more a function of economic 
privilege—she was an heir to the Simon 
and Schuster publishing empire—than political choice.
Carole King began her career as a Brill Building  
songwriter in 1960. As a singer/songwriter, she projected  the quiet confidence of someone who had already been  
successful for more than a decade.
 Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 221
Listening Guide 19The early 1970s saw a trend away from lyrics that focused on social and 
political commentary toward those that expressed the highly individual 
emotions of the singer/songwriter. Carole King is a master of the songwrit-
ing craft; in the 1960s, she and her husband at the time, Gerry Goffin, 
were churning out number one hits for other artists as a member of the songwriting staff at Aldon Music (known collectively as the Brill Building songwriters after the New York building that housed Aldon).
King’s ability to write songs that were simultaneously universal and deeply personal made her one of the era’s 
most beloved singer/songwriters, and Tapestry was one of the most popular recordings of the early 1970s (it seemed to be required listening in women’s dorms at colleges across the United States). The musical cast featured the cream of the crop of Los Angeles session musicians (including drummer Russ Kunkel and guitarist Danny “Kootch” Kortchmar) and a team of backup singers that included James Taylor and Joni Mitchell. It swept the Grammy Awards for 1971. These ac-
colades were a fitting tribute to a songwriter who had provided classic hits for so many artists (her own versions of two of her former hits, Aretha Franklin’s “You Make Me Feel Like a Natural Woman” and the Shirelles’ “Will You Love Me Tomor-row,” are also included on Tapestry).
Musical Style Notes
The style of “You’ve Got a Friend” is dominated by Carole King’s clear and beautifully understated vocals and her tasteful 
and soulful piano style. Producer Lou Adler’s addition of a touch of string orchestra heightens the sentimentality without overpowering the sound texture. The song has several classic elements of a popular hit: the honest, forthright emotions 
of the lyrics; a simple verse-and-chorus structure; and a chorus that has one of those hooks (“Winter, spring, summer, or 
fall . . .”) that remains on replay in your mind for the rest of the day.
Musical “Road Map”
Timing S Commen TS 
0:00–0:10 Piano introduction
0:10–0:58 Verse 1
0:58–1:38 Chorus
1:38–1:48 Piano interlude (same as introduction)
1:48–2:34 Verse 2
(Note entrance of string orchestra to sound texture.)
2:34–3:13 Chorus
3:13–3:42 Bridge (new melody)
3:42–4:25 Chorus
4:25–5:04 Last line of chorus, “You’ve got a friend,” followed by King’s vocal improvisations over this 
line, which continue until the end of the song.“You’ve Got a Friend”
Artist:
 
Carole King
Music/Lyrics by Carole King
Label:
 
Ode (1971), from the  
LP Tapestry222  rock IN ’ ou TTop Forty for sixty-eight weeks and was number one for fifteen of them. Within five years, 
it had sold 13 million copies, becoming the best-selling record of all time up to that point. It also garnered an impressive four Grammies: Album of the Year, Song of the Year (“You’ve 
Got a Friend”), 
r
ecord of the Year (“It’s Too Late”), and Best Female Pop Vocalist. After such 
an outstanding achievement, 
k
ing withdrew from touring almost completely. She adopted a 
strict no-interview policy, becoming, in the words of 
k
atherine 
o
rloff, “a housewife who writes 
songs.”55 While she turned out seven more Top Forty albums before the decade was out, by the 
late 1970s she had moved to Idaho and had limited her live performances to occasional appear-
ances at benefits.
Australian-born Helen 
r
eddy is seldom classified as a singer/songwriter because she 
was essentially a nightclub singer who introduced material by singer/songwriters into her 
act. However, she also co-wrote “I Am Woman” (with 
r
ay Burton), which announced feminism 
to the mainstream audience in 1972, and caused 
r
eddy to take heat from all sides. Its obvious 
connection to feminism angered conservatives, prompting mainstream radio to demur from playing it; the easy-listening, pop feel of the song made it odious to radicals. In her own way, 
r
eddy was committed to the women’s movement (she even started her own Hollywood Hills 
consciousness-raising group), but she never strayed far from its more centrist tendencies. “I am first and foremost a singer,” she told historian Gillian Gaar. “That’s how I earn my living. 
I don’t earn my living as a feminist.”
56 All the same, r eddy would be the first to admit that the 
women’s movement had a palpable effect on her career, as it did on the other female performers 
of the era.
In the early 1970s, all the women—and a good many men—in rock were affected by 
the women’s movement to some degree. Whether they were singer/songwriters or not, the 
women rockers who came into their own during this era—among them Maria Muldaur, Melissa  
Manchester, Bonnie 
r
aitt, and Linda 
r
onstadt—took a soft rock approach in their music. 
 
Maria Muldaur knocked around the acoustic folk scene for years with her husband Geoff (of Jim 
k
weskin’s Jug Band) before she achieved solo success with the balmy “Midnight at the 
o
asis” 
in 1974. Melissa Manchester studied under Paul Simon at the High School of Performing Arts in New York before moving on to middle-level soft rock success on her own. Bonnie 
r
aitt 
 
always seemed destined for superstardom, but at the beginning of the 1970s, it was still nearly 
two decades away. Her love of blues and her proficiency on electric slide guitar—as well as her Quaker upbringing and political activism—set her apart from most of her contemporaries, as did the fact that her father was Broadway singer John 
r
aitt. Linda 
r
onstadt found a pop 
niche much earlier. After major success as the lead singer for the Stone Poneys (“Different Drummer,” 1967), she went solo at the end of the 1960s, steadily built her career, and achieved 
 
number one status with Heart Like a Wheel and its hit single, “You’re No Good,” both released in 1974. 
r
onstadt became one of the most successful solo female vocalists of the decade, with 
two more number one albums—Simple Dreams (1977) and Living in the USA (1978).
All of these women were aware of themselves as female performers and grappled publicly 
with the difficulties of expressing their sexuality comfortably. And they all turned toward soft rock. To the extent that soft rock offered a vehicle for more personal communication, it was 
progressive for women. But to the extent that it looked to acoustic folk as its model, it was re-
gressive in form, and not just for women but for rock as a whole. Many of the men categorized  Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 223as soft rockers or singer/songwriters—from major stars like James Taylor and Paul Simon to 
lesser known artists like Jonathan Edwards, Jim 
c
roce, Harry 
c
hapin, and Mac Davis—were 
identified with a retreat from rock. “[James] Taylor is leading a retreat,” said 
c
hristgau in 
1972, “and the reason why us rock and rollers are so mad at him is simply because the retreat 
has been so successful.”57
Artists like British-born c at Stevens and c anadian Gordon Lightfoot, who both began 
recording in the mid-1960s, added to the perception of regression. Stevens, described by one 
reviewer as “the English James Taylor,” came to the attention of the 
u
.S. market in 1971 with 
Tea for the Tillerman, which included the hit single “Wild World.” As critic Stephen Holden 
has noted, “ Although his records were pretty, they were quite vacuous.”58 Nine Top Forty al -
bums later, Stevens began to tire of the music business; after his 1979 conversion to Islam, he 
withdrew from the business completely. Lightfoot had written songs for Peter, Paul, and Mary, 
Marty 
r
obbins, and others in the mid-1960s. His seven Top Forty albums between 1971 and 
1978, including the number one Sundown (1974), set him up for a comfortable recording career 
in the 1980s, even though his music seemed to be a throwback to an earlier time. Similarly, (Jim) Seals and (Dash) 
c
rofts (“Summer Breeze,” 1972) scored six gold albums with a sound far 
more reserved than they had when they first started playing with the 
c
hamps in 1958. Even 
more successful were folk-rockers America (“ A Horse with No Name,” 1972), who had eight Top Forty albums to their credit.
The singer/songwriter category included some variation, particularly among the critics’ 
choices for the “next Dylan”—David Bromberg, Loudon Wainwright III, John Prine, Steve 
Goodman, even the early Bruce Springsteen,
59 and a range of cult-figure types, including poet 
Leonard 
c
ohen, beatnik barfly Tom Waits, and 
r
andy Newman, whose wry humor more than 
balanced the earnestness of most others in the field. Many of Newman’s compositions were 
clever dramatic narratives that dealt with issues such as racism and other forms of discrimina-
tion (“Sail Away,” “
r
ednecks,” “Short People”), but often from the point of view of the perpetra-
tors, which left the listener to grapple with the uncomfortable ambiguity.
There were several reasons for promoting Bruce Springsteen as the new Dylan. He was 
signed to 
c
olumbia by the same John Hammond who had brought Dylan himself to the label. 
o
n his first two albums—Greetings From Asbury Park, N. J. (1973) and 
The Wild, the Innocent, and the E Street Shuffle (1974)—he exhibited  
Dylan’s tendency to fill a song with more words than a line could hold. At the same time, Springsteen could evoke images of everyday 
working-class lives that were as powerful as they were sympathetic. His live shows were raw, brash, and full of energy, often extending to the three-hour range. Songs like “
r
osalita” from his second al -
bum were absolute showstoppers. More than any other performer, Springsteen demonstrated that singer/songwriters did not have to be hamstrung by the pa-rameters of soft rock. To his followers, he was a legend even before Jon Landau wrote in 1974, “I saw rock and roll’s future and its name is Bruce Springsteen.”
60
Born to Run (1975), co-produced by Springsteen, his manager Mike Appel, and Landau, 
provided Springsteen with the creative and commercial breakthroughs he needed to crack the 
Top Ten. “Thunder 
r
oad,” and “Jungleland” became instant rock classics. 
o
n its release, the Springsteen could evoke images of 
everyday working-class lives that were 
as powerful as they were sympathetic. 
More than any other performer,  
Springsteen demonstrated that singer/songwriters did not have to be hamstrung by the parameters of soft rock.
224  rock IN ’ ou Talbum was hailed as a rock masterpiece; it hit number three and propelled Springsteen to na-
tional fame. In 
o
ctober of that year, both Time and Newsweek pictured him on their covers. At 
about this time, Springsteen began to part ways with Appel. When he insisted on using Landau 
as the producer for his next album, Appel refused. The ensuing lawsuits kept Springsteen tied up in 
court for the next year. By the time Darkness on the Edge of Town was released in 1978, a number 
of its cuts, including the title track, “Badlands,” and “The Promised Land,” were already live performance favorites. Throughout the remainder of the 1970s, Springsteen pared down his music, unleashed the fury of his guitar, and created ever more vivid images. In 1979, he took a step that moved him closer to the activism that would characterize his career in the 1980s, headlining two shows for No Nukes, a weeklong series of concerts protesting the construction of nuclear power plants. (The only sellout nights in the No Nukes series were the nights that Springsteen played.)
The antinuclear movement tapped the creativity and activism of a number of artists at 
the softer end of the spectrum in the 1970s. Among those participating in No Nukes were 
Bonnie 
r
aitt, James Taylor, 
c
arly Simon, Sweet Honey in the 
r
ock, 
c
haka 
k
han, Tom Petty, 
the Doobie Brothers, and 
c
rosby, Stills & Nash. John Hall, formerly of 
o
rleans (“Still the 
o
ne”), 
provided the movement with its anthem “Power.” Jackson Browne had come into his own as a solo vocalist with “Doctor My Eyes” in 1972. Mixing confessional and activist impulses, his albums The Pretender (1976, produced by Landau) and Running on Empty (1977) moved him into 
the Top Ten. Gil Scott-Heron, a political singer/songwriter if there ever was one, was a poet and novelist before collaborating with musician Brian Jackson. He is perhaps best known for his anti-apartheid “Johannesburg” from the album From South Africa to South Carolina (1975). “South 
c
arolina” referred to the song “South 
c
arolina (Barnwell),” protesting plans to build a 
reprocessing plant for nuclear waste in Barnwell. Two years later, Scott-Heron raised the issue even more forcefully in “We Almost Lost Detroit.”
The 
c
alifornia Alliance for Survival was even more successful in recruiting musicians to 
their cause. It staged over fifty shows that included Joan Baez, Peter, Paul, and Mary, Bob Dylan, Gil Scott-Heron, Bruce Springsteen, Jackson Browne, Minnie 
r
iperton, Bette Midler, and Stevie 
Wonder. The artists who worked on these benefits can claim some share of the credit for helping to make the antinuclear power plant movement one of the more successful protest movements of that time. By 1982, 
r
obin Denselow has noted, “every single [nuclear power] station ordered in 
the 
u
SA since 1974 had either been canceled completely or indefinitely postponed.”61
The connection between songwriting and activist politics was made most forcefully in a 
concert that was staged in Harvard Stadium on July 21, 1979. Amandla: Festival of 
u
nity, was 
a benefit concert for the liberation organizations in southern Africa. Headlined by Bob Marley 
and the Wailers, others featured included Patty Labelle, Eddie Palmieri, and 
o
latunji, with Dick 
Gregory as emcee. Bob Marley had already distinguished himself in his native Jamaica as a 
songwriter and performing artist of genuine talent, moral authority, and political principle by the time 
c
hris Blackwell signed him to Island 
r
ecords in 1971. Marley and the Wailers broke 
into the 
u
.S. Top Thirty with two albums—Rastaman Vibration  (1976) and Exodus (1977). By 
1979, Marley had become the first black international superstar. For Amandla,  he demonstrated 
the power of his political convictions, performing songs such as “Slave Driver,” “Get 
u
p, Stand 
u
p,” “No Woman, No 
c
ry,” and a stirring rendition of “War/We Don’t Need No Trouble.”HEAR MORE
Born to Run on 
MySearchLab Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 225Women’s Music: The Feminist Alternative
Sexual politics informed the “hard” versus “soft” rock debate throughout the 1970s, as we have 
seen. Those who felt that rock was irrevocably sexist gravitated toward softer styles. There were some, however, who felt that rock could be a valuable cultural asset for them. Feminist 
critic Ellen Willis wrote:
Music that boldly and aggressively laid out what the singer wanted, loved, hated—as good rock-
and-roll did—challenged me to do the same, and so, even when the content was antiwoman, an-
tisexual, in a sense antihuman, the form encouraged my struggle for liberation. Similarly, timid music made me feel timid, whatever its ostensible politics.
62
In 1972, in an attempt to harness the energy of rock in the service of feminism, the 
 c
hicago Women’s Liberation 
r
ock Band and its East 
c
oast counterpart, the New Haven 
Women’s Liberation 
r
ock Band, recorded Mountain Moving Day for 
r
ounder 
r
ecords. While 
the creation of the record was an overtly political act, even in circles that were less political, 
women began to venture into territory that had been exclusively male. A number of regionally known, all-female rock bands—including Eyes, the Enchanted Forest, Ace of 
c
ups, and Isis—
came and went. Goldie and the Gingerbreads, popular in Great Britain since the early 1960s, never made a dent in the 
u
.S. market. The Deadly Nightshade recorded The Deadly Nightshade 
(1975) and Funky and Western (1976) for 
rc
A and then folded.
A mixed-gender group from Berkeley—Joy of 
c
ooking—showed promise. Two women 
led the band, electric guitarist Terry Garthwaite and electric keyboardist Toni Brown. 
 
Garthwaite and Brown’s music was not political in the narrow sense, but it compellingly 
 
reflected the experiences of women. With two well-received albums to their credit by 1971 
(Joy of Cooking and Closer to the Ground), it looked as if the group might be the beginning of 
a 
 
nonsexist tradition in commercial rock. 
c
hristgau opined: “Many vaguely feminist women 
have no special connection to rock not out of ideology but simply because it has never really spoken to them. Joy of 
c
ooking can end that.”63 However, after a disappointing third album, 
Castles (1972), the group dissolved. Brown and Garthwaite recorded Cross Country (as Toni and 
Terry) in Nashville before embarking on solo careers.
Fanny, started by two sisters from the Philippines, June and Jean Millington, was the 
first self-contained, all-female rock band to be signed to a major label and the only one of its 
generation to hit the Top Forty. Signed to 
r
eprise in 1969 by 
r
ichard Perry, the band faced an 
almost impossible situation. Within the women’s movement, their impolitic name and double-
entendre album titles such as Charity Ball (1971) and Fanny Hill  
(1972) made them something of an embarrassment. A promotional campaign that included “Get Behind Fanny” bumper stickers did not help. The fact that the title cut from Charity Ball reached the 
Top Forty was remarkable. Guitarist June Millington came to re-
sent the fact that the quality of Fanny’s music was measured by the group’s ability to play like men. “You had to prove that you could play like a guy, or play as good as a guy,” Millington later recalled. “That’s really all there was. The whole attitude, what you wore, 
For the members of Fanny, becoming 
a rock band and developing a feminist 
consciousness were mutually exclusive 
choices. The group chose to become 
a rock band and, in so doing, helped women gain access to electric instru-ments—one of the biggest obstacles 
facing women in popular music.
226  rock IN ’ ou Tthe way that you projected, every note that you played, was male territory.”64 In such a mi-
lieu, the women’s movement could never have presented itself as a refuge. For the members of 
Fanny, becoming a rock band and developing a feminist consciousness were mutually exclusive 
choices. The group chose to become a rock band and, in so doing, helped women gain access to 
electric instruments—one of the biggest obstacles facing women in popular music.
The next all-female rock band of note to emerge, the 
r
unaways, modeled themselves 
after Detroit-born rocker Suzi Quatro. Bassist and singer Quatro had played in the Pleasure Seekers, a local Detroit all-female ensemble, before relocating to England and releasing several  
British chart hits (“
c
an the 
c
an,” 1973; “Devil Gate Drive,” 1974) produced by the team of 
Nicky 
c
hinn and Mike 
c
hapman. Her hard rock sound and leather-clad look exerted a 
 
pronounced influence on the young Joan Jett (born Joan Stark), a teenaged transplant from Baltimore to Los Angeles. Joining forces with drummer Sandy West and bassist Michael Steele 
(despite her name, a female performer who would later join the Bangles), Jett formed the first version of the 
r
unaways. Soon the band expanded to a five-piece, adding singer 
c
herie 
c
urrie; 
lead guitarist Lita Ford; and bassist Jackie Fox, who replaced Steele.
Manager 
k
im Fowley, an L.A. scene veteran who had worked alongside Phil Spector, 
tried to turn the 
r
unaways into a hard rock version of the girl groups, with an important 
difference—the band members played their own instruments, and wrote or co-wrote most of their songs. “
c
herry Bomb,” from their first self-titled 1976 album, played upon the group’s 
under-aged sex appeal but also created a potent template for the band’s sound, which teetered between the established styles of hard rock and metal and the emerging style of punk. Yet the 
r
unaways could never quite escape the perception that they were a band manufactured by Being marketed as much for their prurient appeal and double entendre lyrics 
as for their musical abilities made it more difficult for the Runaways to be taken seriously as musicians.
 Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 227Fowley to suit male fantasies. After two more studio albums, the group dissolved in 1979, with 
Jett and Ford going on to have considerable solo success in the next decade.65
The failure of all-female rock bands and the hostility of the music industry toward 
women in mixed bands led to the development of explicitly feminist, mostly folk-oriented, al-ternative music. For the most part, it was music Ellen Willis would have found timid. Women’s 
music, as this new sound came to be called, was institutionalized in 1973 when a group of 
politically active women from Washington, D.
c
., started 
o
livia 
r
ecords at the suggestion of 
singer 
c
ris Williamson. 
o
livia’s first release was a single that featured Williamson’s “If It 
Weren’t for the Music” backed by Meg 
c
hristian’s rendition of “Lady” by 
c
arole 
k
ing/Gerry 
Goffin. The single sold 5,000 copies through mail order. The revenue it generated was used to 
relocate the operation to San Francisco and to finance the label’s first album, Meg 
c
hristian’s 
I Know You Know (1975), which sold 70,000 copies. 
o
livia’s second album, 
c
ris Williamson’s 
The Changer and the Changed, sold over 250,000 copies—revealing the existence of an untapped feminist market.
Seeking to avoid the mainstream music industry completely, women’s music formed its 
own subindustry. 
o
livia established a network of volunteers to distribute its records at concerts, 
in feminist bookstores, and door to door. As other women’s music labels came into existence—
Margie Adam launched Pleiades and 
k
ay Gardner founded Wide Woman/
u
rana—
o
livia’s 
volunteers formed a network called Women’s Independent Labels Distributors (WILD), which 
distributed these labels as well as 
o
livia. Women’s music festivals began to attract thousands 
of feminists annually, the most prominent of which was the Michigan Womyn’s Music Festival, founded in 1976.
66 In 1978, r oadwork, Inc., a national booking agency, was created to coordi-
nate tour bookings.
Women’s music was originally conceived as music by women, for women, and about 
women. It was, for all intents and purposes, lesbian music. However, the term women’s music  
was used because it was less threatening to the public as a whole. “Women were less likely to 
be harassed for listening to or performing ‘women’s music’ than ‘lesbian music,’” said feminist music historian 
c
ynthia Lont.67 There was a tendency to think of women’s music in separat -
ist terms, in keeping with the “cultural feminist” sensibilities that tended to inform the music 
and its politics, which revolved around the assumption that women needed to escape the influ-
ence of men and nurture a distinct women’s culture.68 This separatist orientation was prob-
ably necessary, at least in the short run. The male-dominated music industry was sufficiently 
exclusionary that there were no career paths to positions of power for women. As a way of 
life, however, separatism limited the audience for the music and led to damaging internal ten-
sions within the movement. The experience of Holly Near and 
r
edwood 
r
ecords is a case in 
point. 
o
riginally known as an antiwar activist, Near started 
r
edwood 
r
ecords as an outlet for 
political material after visiting North Vietnam in 1973. Her involvement with the women’s movement deepened, however, and when she came out as a lesbian in 1978 on Imagine My 
 
Surprise (1978), she was criticized by some separatists for using Jeff Langley, her long-time piano player, on the album. Political differences of this sort sapped an inordinate amount of time and energy from women’s music.
In this instance, the marketplace served as the final arbiter. By the 1980s, the market for 
women’s music had become saturated, leaving the alternative industry with no choice but to 228  rock IN ’ ou Texpand its audience or die. “Ironically,” Gillian Gaar wrote, “ o livia now found itself trying to 
break out of the ‘women’s music’ genre they worked so hard to create.”69 The label responded 
to market problems by launching Second Wave to diversify its roster. While this move did 
compromise one of 
o
livia’s original principles—that of using only female musicians—it al-
lowed 
o
livia to help create a cultural space for postpunk feminists, from Tracy 
c
hapman to 
Two Nice Girls. 
u
ltimately unable to maintain its recording business, 
o
livia morphed into a 
lesbian cruise operator in 1988.
From Country Rock to Southern Boogie
In the late 1960s, country rock became yet another term in the growing lexicon of hyphenated rock styles. 
c
ountry music had long been a significant influence in popular music. 
r
ockabilly, a 
major strand of rock ‘n’ roll in the 1950s, was carried into the 1960s by artists like 
r
oy 
 o
rbison 
and Brenda Lee. 
r
ay 
c
harles’s two volumes of pop country and western tunes were his  
best-selling albums. The late 1960s brought down-home, traditional Nashville sounds into the 
rock idiom. The artist who kicked off this trend in late 1967 used clean, unfettered production, accompaniment that was laid back and spare, and sang in an uncharacteristically throaty voice. 
o
n first hearing, it would have been difficult to tell that it was Bob Dylan.
Dylan had been on hiatus since Blonde on Blonde had been re -
leased following his 1966 motorcycle accident. His new album was 
long awaited. When it came, it was totally unlike anything anyone had been expecting. At a time when rock was immersed in techno -
logical overindulgence, Dylan’s John Wesley Harding was as spartan 
as his earlier acoustic efforts. Like its predecessor, Blonde on Blonde, the album was recorded in 
Nashville. However, Blonde on Blonde was the culmination of Dylan’s turn to rock. John Wesley Harding marked a substantial change in direction that seemed to embrace country music’s tra-ditional values in the face of the free-spirited counterculture. The album rose to number two on the album charts, Dylan’s highest position to date. If any doubts existed about the serious-ness of his new artistic direction, he laid them to rest with the release of Nashville Skyline in 1969, which included the Top Ten hit single “Lay Lady Lay” and a duet with country legend Johnny 
c
ash on “Girl from the North 
c
ountry.” As Bill Malone has written, “Dylan lent re-
spectability to a musical form, and to a body of musicians, that had been perceived as ‘corny’ or old fashioned.”
70
Nashville soon became the hot “new” recording center, and country rock became a new 
trend. The top session players in the country music capital began getting so much work that 
they started their own performing ensemble, Area 
c
ode 615. 
o
ver the next few years, folk 
and rock musicians, from Buffy Sainte-Marie to the Nitty Gritty Dirt Band to the Byrds, fol-
lowed Dylan into country, thus putting an end to its association with socially regressive values. Sainte-Marie journeyed to Nashville to record I’m Gonna Be a Country Girl Again, whose title 
song became a hit single in 1972. That same year, the Nitty Gritty Dirt Band recruited country greats 
r
oy Acuff, Doc Watson, Merle Travis, Maybelle 
c
arter, and Earl Scruggs, among oth-
ers, for a three-record album, Will the Circle Be Unbroken. Because the artists who traveled to 
At a time when rock was immersed in 
technological overindulgence, Dylan’s 
John Wesley Harding was as spartan as 
his earlier acoustic efforts.
 Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 229Nashville treated country and western music without condescension, they began to soften the 
negative view that Acuff and other country performers had of hippies.
Most prominent among Dylan’s fellow travelers on the road to country rock at the end 
of the 1960s were four 
c
anadians and one “good ole boy” from Arkansas, known collectively 
as the Band. Guitarist 
r
obbie 
r
obertson, organist Garth Hudson, bassist 
r
ick Danko, and 
pianist 
r
ich Manuel had been fans of country music from childhood, though they were born 
and raised in 
c
anada. Drummer Levon Helm from Marvell, Arkansas, could not have avoided 
country music if he wanted to. 
o
ne by one, beginning in the late 1950s, these players joined 
the Hawks, the backup band for rockabilly artist 
r
onnie Hawkins, with whom they toured for 
years, honing their craft. “There were only three kinds of rock then: rhythm and blues, corny 
white rock, and rockabilly,” said 
r
obertson. “We played rockabilly.”71 They met Dylan through 
folk blues guitarist John Hammond, Jr., the son of Dylan’s producer; at the time, Dylan was 
moving toward electric music. Hired as the backup band for his 1965 tour, they withdrew with 
him to Woodstock, New York, after his accident. There they collaborated—jammed, really—on 
rock’s first significant bootleg, later released by 
c
olumbia as The Basement Tapes. The Band’s 
first two albums—Music from Big Pink  (1968) and The Band  (1969)—introduced a number of 
country rock classics, including Dylan’s “I Shall Be 
r
eleased,” and 
r
obertson’s “The Weight,” 
“
u
p on 
c
ripple 
c
reek,” “ Across the Great Divide,” and “The Night They Drove 
o
ld Dixie 
Down.” (This last song became a Top Ten hit for Joan Baez in 1971.)
In 1973, Dylan and the Band recorded their first official album together. Planet Waves was 
recorded in three days and rose to number one on the album charts almost as fast. They then embarked on Dylan’s first full tour in eight years. The tour was captured on the two-disc LP 
Before the Flood. Because Dylan’s contract with 
c
olumbia was in limbo at this time, both albums 
came out on Asylum, a major coup for David Geffen. However, Dylan returned to 
c
olumbia for 
Blood on the Tracks (1975) and Desire (1976). Both of these albums, which went to number one, 
would have been introspective enough to land Dylan back in the singer/songwriter category had it not been for the hit single “Hurricane,” a political protest song dedicated to boxer 
r
ubin 
“Hurricane” 
c
arter, whom Dylan believed had been wrongly convicted of murder.
Several groups, mostly from Southern 
c
alifornia, picked up on Dylan’s turn toward 
country. The Byrds, who transformed Dylan’s acoustic material into folk rock earlier in the decade, again followed his lead. By this time, the group had recruited Gram Parsons, a Harvard Divinity School dropout, who became a pioneer of country rock. His influence on the Byrds’ Sweethearts of the Rodeo (recorded in Nashville) helped them become the first rock band to play 
the Grand 
o
le 
o
pry. Parsons soon left the Byrds and, with Byrds’ alumni 
c
hris Hillman and 
Gene 
c
larke, formed the Flying Burrito Brothers.72 on The Gilded Palace of Sin  (1969),  they 
merged rock and country as no other group had done and they performed in striking sequined 
Nudie suits embroidered with marijuana leaves instead of the cactus plants and wagon wheels 
selected by most country artists. Parsons would leave the band to record two striking solo al -
bums in the early 1970s before dying of a drug overdose in 1973.
When Stills and Young left Buffalo Springfield (to form 
c
rosby, Stills, Nash & Young), 
two of the group’s remaining members, 
r
ichie Furay and Jim Messina, made up the nucleus of 
another country rock ensemble, Poco. The band never matched their solid performances with 
comparable record sales. By the time Poco’s best-selling album, Legend, was released in 1979, 230  rock IN ’ ou Tnone of the original members were still in the group. Furay had fallen on hard times with 
the intended supergroup configuration of Souther, Hillman, and Furay. Messina had become the second half of Loggins and Messina, a country-inflected pop rock act best known for the 
light rocker, “Your Mama Don’t Dance” (1972); both went solo in the late 1970s, with 
k
enny 
 Loggins recording five best-selling solo albums.
The Eagles, the group that would come to dominate country rock in the 1970s, 
 
embodied 
what writer Barney Hoskyns called the paradox of the “
c
alifornian Dream:” “The fact that the 
original lineup of the Eagles [
r
andy Meisner, Bernie Leadon, Don Henley, and Glen Frey] 
was composed of a southerner and three Midwesterners only confirmed that Los 
 
Angeles was 
still as a much a place of self-reinvention as it had been for a hundred thousand movie star -
lets.”73 The band generated sixteen Top Forty singles and four number one albums in a row, 
but something about their music was unsettling. When rockers like 
c
reedence 
 c
learwater 
 r
evival or the New 
r
iders of the Purple Sage or the Grateful Dead or Neil Young performed 
country-flavored material, they sang with a certain Southern ethos, a down-home earthiness. 
The Eagles were slicker, more polished. They brought country music out of the backwoods 
and into the big city. The word that most readily comes to mind in describing them is corporate. From their signature song, “Take It Easy” (cowritten by Jackson Browne in 1972), about the joys of an unencumbered life on the road, to the music on Hotel California (1976), their seminal statement about the 
 c
alifornia good life, they used country rock as a vehicle for embracing the 
hedonism of the 1970s. “The Eagles are the ultimate in 
c
alifornia dreaming,” said 
c
hristgau, 
“a fantasy of fulfillment that has been made real only in the hip upper-middle-class suburbs of Marin 
c
ounty and the Los Angeles canyons.”74
The Eagles were not unaware of politics. o nce Linda r onstadt—whom Henley and Frey 
had formerly backed up—started dating 
c
alifornia governor Jerry Brown, she pulled them into 
The Eagles were consummate musicians and canny self-promoters. In 
the mid-1970s, they came to dominate country rock with music (and a lifestyle) that was as hedonistic as it was successful.
 Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 231the electoral arena and, later, Jackson Browne imparted an awareness 
of environmental issues. The very fact that the group took its name from Native American folklore suggested political awareness of some 
kind. But in the context of the early 1970s—Nixon’s final years, and 
the culmination of the Vietnam War—the eagle was as likely to rep-resent a bird of prey as a symbol of liberation. Still, the group was po-litically astute enough to know that with a name like the Eagles, it should have a major album out in 1976, the bicentennial year. Hotel California, musically their best effort, was the pinnacle of their success (fifteen million copies in 
u
.S. sales). By this time, guitarists Don Felder and Joe 
Walsh had replaced Leadon in the group, and Meissner was soon to be replaced by former Poco bassist Timothy Schmidt. Eventually, the years of “Life in the Fast Lane,” as the Eagles termed it, took their toll on the group. “I think the underbelly of success is the burden of having to fol-
low things up,” Frey told an interviewer. “We started to run out of gas. Don [Henley] sort of blew his literary nut on Hotel California.”
75 The result was the nightmarish three-year effort it 
took to produce the group’s final studio LP , ironically titled The Long Run. Still, this ordeal did 
not prevent Their Greatest Hits (1971–1975) from becoming the best-selling album of all time, a 
status it still held in 2012.
The success of country rock paralleled that of its pop/country variants. Glen 
c
ampbell and 
John Denver were the biggest beneficiaries of this trend. 
c
ampbell parlayed songs such as “Wichita 
Lineman” and “Galveston” into major pop stardom in the late 1960s. Between 1968 and 1978, he 
tallied eleven gold albums, which brought him his own television program. Denver scored fifteen Top Forty albums and placed thirty-two singles in the Hot 100 between 1971 and 1982. A num-ber of his biggest singles—“Take Me Home, 
c
ountry 
r
oads,” “
r
ocky Mountain High,” “Thank 
God I’m a 
c
ountry Boy,” and “Sunshine on My Shoulder”—suggested country themes, which his 
jeans-and-flannel image reinforced. 
o
ther artists cashed in, too. 
c
anadian Anne Murray placed 
“Snowbird” in the pop and country Top Ten in 1970, kicking off an eleven-year run as a hit-maker.
As rock artists made a move toward country, a number of country artists were drawn to 
rock as a means to challenge the conservative hegemony of Nashville. For their insolence, they 
came to be known collectively as “the outlaws.” They wore the label proudly and marketed it to their advantage, as well as 
rc
A’s. In 1976, the label released Wanted: The Outlaws, a compila-
tion LP with songs by Willie Nelson, Waylon Jennings, Tompall Glaser, and Jessi 
c
olter. The 
album became the first certified platinum country album.
Nelson and Jennings were the most famous of the so-called outlaws. By the time he be -
gan to tire of Nashville’s slickness in the mid-1960s, Willie Nelson had toed the country mark for over a decade, achieving great success as both a writer—he wrote “
c
razy,” Patsy 
c
line’s 
biggest hit—and a performer. Before the 1960s ended, he had more than a dozen albums to 
his credit. When he moved back to Texas in the early 1970s, he changed his image, growing 
his hair long and discarding his western suits and ties in favor of jeans and T-shirts. His new look suited both his laid-back, conversational singing style and his refusal to be pigeonholed for commercial reasons. He first came to the attention of the rock press with Shotgun Willie and Phases and Stages, which he recorded in the early 1970s. He crossed over to the pop market with Red Headed Stranger in 1975, his first of more than thirty albums to make the pop charts. In 1978, he recorded his best-selling album of the decade, Waylon and Willie.The Eagles were slicker, more polished. 
They brought country music out of the 
backwoods and into the big city. The 
word that most readily comes to mind 
in describing them is corporate.
232  rock IN ’ ou TWaylon Jennings’s country roots first led him toward rock in 1958, when he joined 
Buddy Holly on bass. (It was Jennings who gave up his seat to the Big Bopper on the flight 
that killed the Big Bopper, Holly, and 
r
itchie Valens.) Throughout the 1960s, Jennings fought 
hard for artistic freedom; his influences ran as far afield as Dylan and the Beatles. He even had 
a minor hit with “MacArthur Park” with the 
k
imberleys in 1969. Like the rest of the outlaws, 
Jennings resisted easy categorization and musical limitations, but he was always respectful of 
his roots. “The ultimate irony of the 
o
utlaws,” Bill Malone has said, “may be that, while draw-
ing upon a diverse array of musical sources and reaching out to new audiences, they did more to preserve a distinct identity for country music than most of their contemporaries who wore the ‘country’ label.”
76
Malone’s comment was directed at artists like k enny r ogers and Dolly Parton, who 
achieved incredible mainstream success with material that hugged the middle of the pop/coun-
try road. Emmylou Harris took a different route. Harris was a truly eclectic performer who 
managed to stay grounded in tradition even as she explored rock-based material in collabora-
tion with Gram Parsons and with her versatile Hot Band. While the group was adept at play-ing traditional acoustic country, their electric numbers were bold enough to be linked with a more extreme development in country-identified rock, which came to be known as redneck rock or, more politely, Southern boogie.
Like other hard-rock bands, the Southern boogie bands—the Allman Brothers, the 
Marshall Tucker Band, Lynyrd Skynyrd, the 
c
harlie Daniels Band, Molly Hatchett, and 
ZZ Top—were based in blues and country; their music was loud and sometimes crude; 
and they exhibited the same macho posturing, albeit with a bit 
of “good ole boy” flair. However, they emerged at a time when the South was a growing population center that was viewed by much of the rest of the 
u
.S. as a backwater due to the civil rights 
struggles of the past decade. The truculent identification of these bands with the South could appear reactionary, especially 
when wedded to a willingness to flaunt the 
c
onfederate flag. Yet they also asserted a ver-
sion of Southern counterculture that brought the region’s music and image up to date with the times.
The prototypical Southern boogie band was the Allman Brothers, which featured broth-
ers Duane and Greg Allman on guitar and keyboards, Dickie Betts on guitar, Berry 
o
akley on 
bass, and Jai Johanny “Jaimo” Johanson and Butch Trucks on drums. Duane had been a session 
player at Fame Studios in Muscle Shoals, backing artists like Aretha Franklin and Wilson Pickett. 
He also contributed fiery slide guitar in tandem with Eric 
c
lapton’s solo lines on Derek and 
the Dominoes’ Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs (1970).  In the Allmans, Duane traded lines 
with fellow guitarist Betts, creating a unique twin-guitar sound that wove intricate patterns over a strong percussive base. They first came to the attention of the national audience with Idlewild South (1970). Eat a Peach (1972), the band’s first Top Ten album, contains Duane’s last recordings. (Duane was killed in a motorcycle accident before the album was completed; a year later, Berry 
o
akley died in a similar accident.) The band continued after Duane’s death, record-
ing their best-selling album, Brothers and Sisters, which hit number one on the album charts 
and yielded the number two hit single “
r
amblin’ Man” in 1973. That same year, along with Like other hard-rock bands, the Southern 
boogie bands were based in blues and 
country; their music was loud and  
sometimes crude; and they exhibited 
the same macho posturing, albeit with  a bit of “good ole boy” flair.
 Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 233two other acts—the Band and the Grateful 
Dead—the group headlined a single show at Watkins Glen, New York, that attracted some 
600,000 fans, dwarfing even Woodstock in 
audience size. Although commercial success continued unabated throughout the decade, greatness, that very elusive quality, remained out of reach after the loss of Duane.
The Marshall Tucker Band, named 
for the owner of the band’s rehearsal space, was softer and more laid back than the other Southern boogie bands, but still in the mold 
of country rock. Like the Allmans, the group was signed to Phil Walden’s 
c
apricorn label. They toured with the Allmans and, along with 
other 
c
apricorn acts, did benefits for Jimmy 
c
arter. The Tucker Band was respectable enough 
to be rewarded with gigs at the White House after 
c
arter’s victory, but other Southern rockers 
lived life closer to the edge.
Lynyrd Skynyrd, a variant spelling of the name of the high school gym teacher who 
suspended the group for wearing long hair, were fiercely proud to be Southern. The band’s first two albums—arguably their best—were produced by Al 
k
ooper. The first contained 
 
“Freebird,” a ten-minute tribute to Duane Allman that became something of a signature song 
for the group. The second had the group’s best-selling single, “Sweet Home Alabama,” an explicit defense of the Southern way of life in response to Neil Young’s “Southern Man.” If 
Southern rock had an ideological component, this was it. (It would pop up again in 
c
harlie 
Daniels’s “The South’s Gonna Do It Again.”) With four gold and four platinum albums by 
1980, Lynyrd Skynyrd found a ready audience, if not critical praise, for their music, which was as wild and rowdy as their personal lives. The beginning of the end for the group came in 1977 when a plane crash claimed the lives of lead singer 
r
onnie Van Zant and band members Steve 
and 
c
assie Gaines.
ZZ Top was a Texas-based trio that took Southern rock into the 1980s. Their influences 
ranged from acid rock to the down-home blues of John Lee Hooker and Elmore James, and gui-tarist Billy Gibbons was an adept blues-rock stylist. Album titles like Tres Hombres, Fandango!, 
Tejas, Deguello, and El Loco suggested a Tex-Mex cultural influence. 
c
uts such as “La Grange” The Allman Brothers were the prototypical 
Southern boogie band. Except for its identifica-tion with the South, there was little that sepa-
rated Southern boogie from hard rock in general. 
The Allmans’ signature sound included rhythm and blues influences and intricate instrumental harmonies.
234  rock IN ’ ou T(from Tres Hombres) and “Tush” (from Fandango!) had a thick sonic distortion that brought the 
band close to heavy metal—a direction they would follow into the 1980s along with Southern  
rock counterparts like Molly Hatchett, who came closest to generating a Southern style of 
heavy metal on guitar-drenched tracks like “Flirtin’ with Disaster,” the title track of their platinum-
selling 1979 album.
Mad with Power: Heavy Metal
Depending on one’s perspective, the softer rock and soul styles of the 1970s represented either 
a withdrawal from the political engagement of the 1960s, a reevaluation of its efficacy, a fore-grounding of music as entertainment, or a new strategy for making the world a better place. 
In contrast, heavy metal represented an absolute rejection of the peace 
and love ethos. The music was too intense to be regarded as entertain-ment, and it was too self-absorbed to worry about making the world a better place. It was the critics’ worst nightmare: hard rock taken to the extreme, with no socially redeeming features. 
o
r so it seemed.
The origins of the genre’s name can be traced to a number of sources. 
It is used in chemistry to describe the heavier elements in the periodic table. In literature, the term has been ascribed incorrectly to the William Burroughs novel Naked Lunch and correctly 
to his later novel Nova Express. Most agree that its first appearance in popular music occurred 
in Steppenwolf ’s “Born to Be Wild” (1968), a Top Ten single that became a biker anthem after it was featured in the film Easy Rider. In rock journalism, the term assumed currency in the early 1970s, most notably in the pages of Creem magazine by critics like “Metal” Mike Saunders 
(often credited as first to use it in a music review) and the incomparable Lester Bangs.
By the time heavy metal coalesced into a genre in the early 1970s, it had developed sev-
eral distinctive components. 
c
hief among these was sound quality: “The essential sonic ele-
ment in heavy metal is power, expressed as sheer volume,” Deena Weinstein has claimed.77 “If 
there is one feature that underpins the coherence of heavy metal as a genre,” 
r
obert Walser 
has noted, “it is the power chord” (a chord that is drenched in distortion and volume and held 
to maximum sustain).78 The power of heavy metal was intended to overwhelm its listeners, to 
flood them in a kind of sonic tidal wave. Heavy metal was not a violent break from hard rock; 
rather, it was a logical extension of hard rock with sufficient variation to defy its detractors’ 
simplistic characterization of it as a wall of noise.
According to Weinstein, the origins of heavy metal lie in blues-based rock and psyche -
delic music.79 Walser concurs with Weinstein’s analysis but adds classical music to the list of 
sources.80 Thus, heavy metal bears the influences of Muddy Waters, Howlin’ Wolf, B. B. k ing, 
and 
c
huck Berry at one extreme, and Bach, Vivaldi and Wagner at the other. As always, the 
genre’s boundaries were a matter of subjective judgment. Black 
o
ak Arkansas occupied the 
territory between metal and Southern boogie. The J. Geils Band played hard blues-based rock, 
but their Boston contemporaries, Aerosmith, moved closer to heavy metal. Bachman-Turner 
o
verdrive, from 
c
anada, formed after guitarist 
r
andy Bachman left Guess Who (“ American 
Woman”), pushed boogie to the limit on “Takin’ 
c
are of Business” and unleashed Who-like 
Heavy metal represented an absolute 
rejection of the peace and love ethos. 
It was the critics’ worst nightmare: 
hard rock taken to the extreme, with 
no socially redeeming features. Or so it seemed.
 Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 235power chords on “You Ain’t Seen Nothin’ Yet,” but fell just short of metal in the eyes of most 
observers. According to Walser, “[t]he sound that would become known as heavy metal was definitively codified in 1970 with the release of Led Zeppelin II, Black Sabbath’s Paranoid, and 
Deep Purple in Rock .”
81 The ascension of these three pivotal bands illustrates the diversity of 
sources that produced the genre.
Heavy metal’s immediate acid and blues rock antecedents were what one might expect. 
Eric 
c
lapton, Jeff Beck, and Jimmy Page, the lead guitarists who fronted the Yardbirds, marked 
the path. As a founding member of 
c
ream, 
c
lapton overlaid the blues with the psychedelic 
experience. 
c
uts like “Sunshine of Your Love” began to pull together the elements that define 
heavy metal: an elemental riff played at maximum volume by guitar and bass, compounded by 
powerful drumming. Jimi Hendrix was a parallel acid/blues influence who pushed amplifica-tion to its limit. A number of 
u
.S. groups, including Blue 
c
heer (“Summertime Blues,” 1968) 
and Steppenwolf, also tested the boundaries of volume and distortion; while British bands the 
Who and the 
k
inks mastered the art of the power chord. These influences guided Jimmy Page 
when he sought to extend the work of the Yardbirds in a new configuration: Led Zeppelin.
For 
u
.S. audiences in particular, Led Zeppelin—Jimmy Page (guitar), 
r
obert Plant 
(vocals), John Paul Jones (bass), and John Bonham (drums)—became the archetypal heavy 
metal group. Initially billed as the New Yardbirds, Led Zeppelin (reportedly, the Who’s immod-est drummer, 
k
eith Moon, quipped that the group’s music would go over like a “lead zeppelin”) 
filled the void for fans looking for a new intensity in rock. From the release of the group’s first self-titled album in 1969, Zeppelin was a hit. Each of its eight subsequent albums released before the end of the 1970s rose to number one or two on the pop charts. Aided by the business acumen of manager Peter Grant, the group set concert attendance records all over the 
u
nited States. They met less enthusiasm 
in the rock press, however, especially in the pages of Rolling Stone where the band’s early albums received decidedly lukewarm reviews.
Black Sabbath followed a similar heavy 
metal road and enjoyed an equally poor rela-tionship with the press. The group started as Earth, a working-class, hippie blues rock band from Birmingham, England. They changed HEAR MORE
Robert Plant on 
MySearchLab
For many Americans, Led Zeppelin defined heavy 
metal. Despite a broad range of influences,  however, they were not accepted in art rock 
 circles. Instead, they were trashed from the left 
for their sexism and condemned by the right for their fascination with the occult.236  rock IN ’ ou Ttheir name to Black Sabbath, taken from an old Boris k arloff horror movie. The name change 
coincided with a move to a louder, more aggressive style and something of a break with the 
group’s hippie past. In their new incarnation, the group paralleled Zeppelin’s success, with five 
platinum albums in a row in less than four years, peaking with Master of Reality in 1971. Defini-
tive tracks like “Iron Man” and “
c
hildren of the Grave” joined guitarist Tony Iommi’s massive 
riffs to bleak lyrics that captured the loss of sixties optimism, with singer 
o
zzy 
o
sbourne’s 
voice conveying an appropriate air of torment. For this feat, they were charged with a “com-plete lack of subtlety, intelligence, and originality.”
82
This type of blanket dismissal was reminiscent of the things parents and critics said about 
rock ‘n’ roll when it first emerged in the 1950s. 
c
omplaints that heavy metal was too loud, that 
you couldn’t hear the words, that it all sounded the same overlooked considerable variation in 
the music, and revealed a growing intra-generational gap between older rock fans who had 
come of age in the 1960s (and who comprised the dominant group of rock critics) and a new teenaged fan base just finding its taste as the 1970s got under way. Some of the criticism derived from the notion that metal embodied and exaggerated rock’s most sexist impulses. Perhaps the best example is Zeppelin’s “Whole Lotta Love,” lifted from Willie Dixon’s “You Need Love,” which appeared on Led Zeppelin II. Built around an insistent, propulsive guitar riff and Plant’s leering, sex-infused falsetto vocals, “Whole Lotta Love” seemed to capture 
male desire in sonic form, while treating women as mere objects. The 
song was not so straightforward in its connotations, however—an extended, abstract middle section featuring swirls of electronic noise suggested that the masculine drives at work in the song were not so absolute, and even presented the notion that Plant played submissive female to the to swaggering virtuosity put forth by Page.
83
Hardly homogeneous in sound, Led Zeppelin was influenced by everything from u .S. 
soul music to what Jimmy Page called his “
c
IA ” influences (
c
eltic-Indian-Arabic). At a time 
when rock styles appeared to be bifurcating between quiet and loud, “soft” and “hard,” Zeppelin 
inventively split the difference.84 The band juxtaposed a side of mostly heavy, electric music 
with a side of more subdued acoustic songs on Led Zeppelin III (1970). 
c
ontinuing the mix of 
acoustic and electric sounds for the untitled 1971 follow-up (often referred colloquially as Led 
Zeppelin IV ), the band crafted the seminal “Stairway to Heaven,” which builds from an acoustic 
intro to a blistering climax, with Plant’s piercing tenor soaring over Page’s deafening salvo of 
raw guitar licks.
Deep Purple had just as broad a range of influences, as well as a strong psychedelic bent 
and the beginnings of that conscious incorporation of classical virtuosity that would become increasingly important to the genre. The group first hit the Top Ten with “Hush” in 1968. The use of an organ gave the group a fuller sound than most of their contemporaries and landed them at first in the company of groups like Vanilla Fudge, who described their music as “psychedelic symphonic rock,” and Iron Butterfly. Vanilla Fudge interpreted songs like the 
Supremes’ “You 
k
eep Me Hanging 
o
n” and the Beatles’ “Eleanor 
r
igby” as if they were being 
played at a speed slower than most turntables could go, thereby creating in listeners the feel-ing of a drug-induced effect. Working in a similar way, Iron Butterfly parlayed the droning, Complaints that heavy metal was too 
loud, that you couldn’t hear the words, 
that it all sounded the same overlooked 
considerable variation in the music, and 
revealed a growing intra-generational gap between older rock fans who had come of age in the 1960s and a new 
teenaged fan base just finding its taste 
as the 1970s got under way.
 Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 237seventeen-minute “In-A-Gadda-Da-Vida” from their debut album of the same name into Atlantic’s 
best-selling record.
Deep Purple evidenced a comparable psychedelic connection on The Book of Taliesyn. Mu-
sic from this album was used in the science-fiction movie 2001: A Space Odyssey, the ultimate 
filmic acid trip. 
c
lassical influences also became evident in Deep Purple’s music early on; both 
guitarist 
r
itchie Blackmore and organist John Lord had studied classical music. The critical 
and financial success of Lord’s Concerto for Group and Orchestra (1970) suggested that the group would follow the trajectory of an art rock ensemble, but Blackmore balked, feeling “that the whole orchestra thing was a bit tame. I mean, you’re playing in the 
r
oyal Albert Hall, and 
the audience sits there with folded arms, and you’re standing there playing next to a violinist who holds his ears every time you take a solo. It doesn’t make you feel particularly inspired.”
85 
Blackmore wanted to make use of classical resources, but in the context of heavy metal. He 
described the chord pattern for his solo on “Highway Star” from Deep Purple’s best-selling 
album, Machine Head (1972), as “a Bach progression.” His guitar playing became the hallmark 
of precision and virtuosity that defined the next generation of metal guitarists. It shows up 
clearly on Machine Head, which includes the group’s best-known single, “Smoke on the Water.”
o
nly one 
u
.S. band could rival British groups like Led 
 
Zeppelin, Black Sabbath, or Deep Purple in its unique combination of macho swagger, commercial success, and critical disdain: Grand  
Funk 
r
ailroad, a group that began in Flint, Michigan. Grand 
Funk played raw, basic rock with a distinct lack of polish. Widely castigated by the rock press for their lack of musical chops and 
songwriting ability, they were promoted by their savvy manager, Terry 
k
night, as populist heroes that rock’s youngest fans could 
call their own. Grand Funk tallied eleven gold albums in a row—eight of them Top Ten—peaking with We’re an American Band and a number one single of the same name in 1973. Equally impressive, the band became the first since the Beatles to sell out New York’s Shea Stadium for a July 1971 concert, demonstrating the degree to which early heavy metal coin-cided with the continued growth of the rock concert as a large-scale commodity that gener-ated unprecedented profits for bands and their managers, and fostered a powerful sense of community between the musicians and their fans.
86
By the mid-1970s, a whole generation of rockers had moved proudly toward heavy metal, 
taking paths that their predecessors had followed. Some came from psychedelia. For example, 
r
ush, a 
c
anadian group, had begun by playing 
c
ream and Iron Butterfly covers in 1974, using 
a classic power trio lineup. With the 1976 release of 2112 , a concept album loosely based on 
right-wing novelist Ayn 
r
and’s Anthem, 
r
ush merged progressive rock with the heavier sound 
that became their signature. When Judas Priest released Rocka Rolla in 1974, they were a hard 
acid-rock band. By Sad Wings of Destiny, released one year later, however, they were squarely in the heavy metal camp. 
u
riah Heep took a similar road. Ted Nugent made a more gradual break 
from his psychedelic past (as leader of the Amboy Dukes) to a solo career that reached a heavy metal peak with the release of Cat Scratch Fever in 1977.
Several blues-based rock bands—such as England’s Humble Pie and 
c
leveland, 
o
hio’s 
the James Gang—straddled the line between heavy metal and its stylistic kissing cousin, Only one U.S. band could rival British 
groups like Led Zeppelin, Black Sab-
bath, or Deep Purple in its unique com-
bination of macho swagger, commercial 
success, and critical disdain: Grand Funk Railroad,
238  rock IN ’ ou T
Listening Guide 20If you were between the ages of 13 and 20 in 1972, and you had an 
electric guitar, you learned the opening riff of “Smoke on the Water.” This 
compelling, repetitive, distortion-soaked guitar riff is one of the hallmarks 
of hard rock and heavy metal, and aspiring young electric guitar players in 
the 1970s honed their craft by learning it. Thanks to the success of this song, Deep Purple is included in most discussions of “proto-metal,” but this classification doesn’t really give us the big picture of their complex 
stylistic background.
At the end of the 1960s and the beginning of the 1970s, the 
lines between “heavy metal” and “hard rock” were not clearly defined. To 
add confusion to the issue, many proto–heavy metal bands shared certain 
elements with “art” or “progressive” rock bands: complicated musical structures, orchestral electronic effects, and an 
obsession with technical virtuosity. Deep Purple navigated several of these channels. After experimenting with blues and art rock, the band regrouped in the early 1970s with a new bassist and vocalist, and the new band (Ritchie Blackmore, 
guitar; Jon Lord, keyboards; Ian Paice, drums; Roger Glover, bass; and Ian Gillan, vocals) had a somewhat “harder” rock sound, even though they never completely let go of their classical leanings.
Musical Style Notes
The famous opening guitar riff of “Smoke on the Water” has all the hallmarks of a blues lick: the movement from the key-
note to the lowered third note of the scale, the flatted fifth note of the scale sliding back down to the fourth, and the use of rhythmic syncopation (see, for example, the second bar where the first note appears on the “and” between the first 
and second beats).
When the rhythm section enters, however, we know it’s rock and roll just from the driving rhythmic pattern. Listen 
for the bass player’s relentless repeated tonic note (tonic being “do,” the first note in a major or minor scale).
Ian Gillan’s vocal sound is strongly associated with hard rock and heavy metal—a high tenor sound with a certain 
amount of raspiness—and is a perfect compliment to the distorted guitar tone, accomplished by raising the volume to a 
level in excess of what the amplifier can handle (overdriving the amp), resulting in a gritty sound.
“Smoke on the Water” is also a good example of instrumentation built up in layers, a technique used by a number 
of art rock and heavy metal bands. (Led Zeppelin’s “Stairway to Heaven” is another very famous example.)“Smoke on the Water”
Artist: Deep Purple
Music/Lyrics by Ritchie Blackmore, 
Ian Gillan, Roger Glover, Jon Lord, and Ian Paice
Label: Warner Bros (1972), from  
the LP 
Machine Head
Beat: 1  +  2  +  3  +  4  + 1  +  2  +  3  +  4  + 1  +  2  +  3  +  4  + 1  +  2  +  3  +  4  +
Scale Degree 1      ♭3     4          1     ♭3    ♭5  4 1     ♭3      4          ♭3     1  1
Actual Note G      B ♭     C          G     B ♭    D ♭  C G     B ♭      C          B ♭     G  G
Note: “ ♭3” indicates the flattened third step of the scale. Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 239Musical “Road Map”
Timing S Commen TS 
0:00–0:18 Begins with the famous distorted guitar riff, henceforth referred to as the “SOTW” riff.
0:18–0:27 Another guitar track is layered in, with high-hat cymbal.
0:27–0:35 Drum adds backbeat to texture (drum strike on second and fourth beats of each bar).
0:35–0:52 Bass layered in, playing steady “eighth notes” (one-and-two-and-three-and-four-and).
0:52–1:26 Verse 1
1:26–1:55 Refrain, “Smooooke on the waaaa-ter,” followed by “SOTW” riff, two times.
1:55–2:29 Verse 2
2:29–2:58 Refrain, “Smooooke on the waaaa-ter,” followed by “SOTW” riff, two times.
2:58–3:39 Ritchie Blackmore guitar solo over the structural form of the verse.
3:39–3:56 Solo ends over the “SOTW” riff.
3:56–4:29 Verse 3
4:29–5:39 Refrain, “Smooooke on the waaaa-ter,” followed by “SOTW” riff, four times; music fades as  
guitar begins to solo.
Listening Guide 20240  rock IN ’ ou Thard rock. When Aerosmith was first signed to c olumbia in 1972, the group was considered 
Boston’s answer to the 
r
olling Stones. Lead singer Steven Tyler even looked (and pranced) 
a bit like Mick Jagger. By the time Toys in the Attic made the Top Forty in 1975, the group 
had begun edging toward the lighter side of heavy metal, a niche they occupied successfully 
throughout the 1980s. Bad 
c
ompany, a group under the tutelage of Zeppelin’s manager, Peter 
Grant, featured the emotive, blues-informed vocals of Paul 
r
odgers, formerly of Free. 
c
uts like 
“
c
an’t Get Enough” and “
r
eady for Love” converted Zeppelin’s far-reaching model into a more 
streamlined approach built for A
or
 radio.
Furthering metal’s move toward wider pop accessibility—which would be more fully re-
alized in the 1980s—was Van Halen, the band that established Los Angeles as the center of the heavy metal universe, at least in the 
u
nited States. Eddie Van Halen and his drummer brother, 
Alex, were born in the Netherlands but raised in 
c
alifornia, where they trained to become clas-
sical musicians until the lure of rock won out. With Michael Anthony on bass and David Lee 
r
oth on vocals, Van Halen was a high-energy act right from the beginning. Signed by Warner 
in the late 1970s, the group’s debut LP , V an Halen (1978), made the Top Twenty. Every subse-
quent album charted higher than the one before it until the group hit number one in 1986.
While Van Halen owed its early success partially to 
r
oth’s athletic, overtly sexual (some 
would say sexist) performances, the group’s defining and sustaining force was Eddie Van 
 
Halen’s pathbreaking guitar style. Like many of his contemporaries, Van Halen was drawn to 
hard rock through the blues. 
c
iting Eric 
c
lapton as a primary influence, the young guitarist 
also applied his classically trained discipline to propel metal guitar playing to new heights. Van Halen’s solo on the appropriately titled “Eruption” from the group’s debut album heralded the arrival of a new virtuosity in heavy metal, most evident in the rapid, finger-tapped lines that 
marked the solo’s climax. Walser describes the solo as “one minute and twenty-seven seconds 
of exuberant and playful virtuosity, a violinist’s precise and showy technique inflected by the vocal rhetoric of the blues and rock and roll irreverence.”
87 Guitar Player  magazine chose Van 
Halen as the best rock guitarist for five years in a row.
Metal’s preoccupation with virtuosity, exhibited most notably by the succession of elec-
tric guitarists that runs from 
r
itchie Blackmore to Van Halen, only furthered its masculine ori-
entation. In the 1970s, there were almost no women in heavy metal save the 
r
unaways, whose 
guitarist Lita Ford did her best approximation of the guitar hero pose usually reserved for men. 
The only challengers in this realm were the Wilson sisters, Ann and Nancy, who rose to promi-nence as key members of Heart. Even though Heart’s debut release, Dreamboat Annie (1976), pictured Ann and Nancy bare-shouldered on either side of a red heart, their combination of ballads and near-heavy metal rock propelled them past novelty status all the way to number seven on the pop charts. Subsequent hits like “Barracuda” confirmed the group’s ability to rock with the best of them. In time, the group achieved a superstar status that carried them through 
the 1980s. In the 1970s, however, both Heart and the 
r
unaways were anomalies.
If heavy metal was condemned—or, more likely, avoided—in progressive circles for its 
sexism, it was assaulted from the right for its fascination with the occult. Fundamentalist groups accused Led Zeppelin of including satanic messages on “Stairway to Heaven” through backmasking, the process of recording passages backward. Groups like Black Sabbath and 
 
Judas Priest (formed in 1974) attracted attention simply by virtue of their names. Album titles  Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 241such as Sabbath Bloody Sabbath and Sin after Sin only added fuel to the hell fire. Police agencies 
argued that Australia’s A
c
/D
c
 (also founded in 1974) stood for Anti-
c
hrist/Devil’s 
c
hildren; 
given metal’s preoccupation with power, the more obvious reference to electric currents should 
have been considered an equally likely acronym. In 1990, Zeppelin’s 
r
obert Plant chastised 
Americans for their inability to understand the British sense of irony and sarcasm. “There  
was . . . a lot of humor in the music,” he explained in a retrospective interview. “Not all this 
glowering satanic crap. . . [I]t’s very American. Nowhere else in the world has anybody ever considered it or been concerned or bothered at all about that.”
88 Still, Black Sabbath’s o zzy 
 o
sbourne marketed the connection with satanism most effectively, particularly in his solo 
 
career in the 1980s, when it became an even more volatile issue.
Faced with a widespread lack of industry support, if not outright hostility, metal came to 
wear its outsider status like a badge of honor; after all, part of its mission was to fly in the face of respectability. Blue Öyster 
c
ult, a New York metal group in the Black Sabbath mold, used 
occult-style lyrics written by critic 
r
ichard Meltzer, who was also a vocalist for the group, and 
added Nazi paraphernalia to their metal regalia. Even with such trappings, their biggest hit “(Don’t Fear) The 
r
eaper” tended toward a pop sound, with sweet harmonies and just a hint 
of metal in the instrumental break. Blue Öyster 
c
ult and Motörhead also added gratuitous 
umlauts to their names to further enhance the aura of transgression that surrounded them, and in doing so prefigured a growing alliance between metal and the rising punk rock style that 
would come to further fruition in years to come.
89
Kiss played metal as heavy as anyone and were eminently successful at it. Their 
equally heavy use of makeup suggested a connection to the ascending glam rock movement that challenged traditional gender roles as never before.
242  rock IN ’ ou Tother heavy metal artists pushed the limits of decorum through 
performance and personal appearance. It was not just that the shows 
got harder and heavier or that strange animal rituals and awesome py-
rotechnics were added; it was that heavy metal began to challenge the 
traditional concept of masculinity from within its exclusionary male environment. By the early 1970s, women and gays had become suffi-ciently vocal that gender roles and sexual preferences were no longer 
beyond questioning. Mick Jagger had long played with androgyny, but to find the beginnings of gender-bending in that area of heavy metal that blossomed into glitter or glam rock was most unexpected. Among the weirdest acts was a group of white, middle-class suburban ath-letes from Phoenix, Arizona, who named themselves after their leader, a minister’s son who called himself Alice 
c
ooper. Alice 
c
ooper represented a clear break with the counterculture. 
“Even hippies hated us,” Alice has said, “and it’s hard to get a hippie to hate anything.”90 They 
made no pretense to authenticity or blues roots, but instead embraced the artifice of television 
and pop culture. The group’s big break came the night they cleared the posh club 
c
heetah af-
ter only three songs. Frank Zappa was sufficiently impressed that he signed them to his label, 
which brought them to the attention of its parent, Warner.
By 1976, the group had brought out eight gold or platinum albums, including the num-
ber one Billion Dollar Babies (1973) and a few memorable hit singles like “Eighteen” (1971) and “School’s 
o
ut” (1972). Still, Alice 
c
ooper’s importance to rock history primarily concerned the 
spectacle of their stage show, which included cutting the heads off baby dolls and having Alice himself put to death at each concert’s climax. The group’s members performed in spandex, high-heeled boots, and makeup. Forget that they looked about as feminine as Frank Sinatra; these guys wore makeup at a time when “real men”—especially heterosexual ex-athletes from 
Phoenix—did not wear makeup. They combined sex and violence into a package especially alluring for teenagers coming to terms with their own changing bodies, and so represented a perverse challenge to the security of fixed gender roles.
91
kiss, a group that played metal as heavy as anyone with a posture that was just as ma-
cho, made makeup their trademark. 
u
nlike 
c
ooper, the members of 
k
iss did not use makeup 
to portray androgyny. Instead, they donned whole personas. Bassist Gene Simmons became 
a ghoulish demon; drummer Peter 
c
riss, a cat; guitarists Paul Stanley and Ace Frehley, a star 
and a spaceman. The group’s gimmick of never being photographed without their makeup—a 
gimmick to which they held fast until 1983—added measurably to their mystique. Meanwhile, their stage shows built upon the spectacular qualities pioneered by 
c
ooper, featuring flash pot 
explosions, squirting blood and shooting fire (both issued from the mouth of Simmons), a gui-tar that sprayed smoke and sparks as Ace Frehley soloed away, and levitating drum risers.
All that Glitters does not Sell Gold
kiss and Alice c ooper brought a new level of theatricality to rock performance in the 1970s. As 
such, they intersected with the glam, or glitter rock, style that also arose in the early years of 
the decade, and challenged traditional notions of masculinity and femininity as no other music 
It was not just that the shows got 
harder and heavier or that strange ani-
mal rituals and awesome pyrotechnics 
were added; it was that heavy metal be-
gan to challenge the traditional concept of masculinity from within its exclusion-ary male environment.
 Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 243had. As Iain c hambers has written, “‘Glam’ or ‘glitter’ rock’s inroads into the public figure of 
male sexuality, in which the chameleon figure of David Bowie was seminal, seemed to crack an 
image brittle with repression.”92 In the u nited States, the focal point for the developing glitter 
scene was New York’s Mercer Art 
c
enter, where groups like the Forty-Second Street Harlots, 
Teenage Lust, the transvestite Wayne 
c
ounty, and most notably, the New York Dolls, held sway.
The Dolls played a brand of rock that would have placed the group somewhere near the 
r
olling Stones on the popular music continuum, but the music was tinged with the kind of 
informed cynicism that could be bred only in New York. Although they appeared in full drag 
on the cover of their self-titled 1973 debut album, in concert they were less inclined toward androgyny than a colorful assemblage of thrift shop fashion with designer overtones. Lead-ing critics of the day such as 
r
obert 
c
hristgau and Ellen Willis championed the band’s high 
octane, rough around the edges sound—which would later be judged an important precursor to punk—but the band never got beyond cult status and broke up in 1975. Lead singer David Johansen did achieve some measure of pop success in the 1980s as Buster Poindexter.
The glitter scene in England was more developed, extending the music’s reach to the 
rarefied atmosphere of art rock in one direction and teenybopper pop in another. When the 
tantalizing Marc Bolan shortened the name of his group from Tyrannosaurus 
r
ex to T. 
r
ex, 
he signaled a move to an electric hard rock style (“Bang a Gong [Get It 
o
n],” 1972) and 
brought the world of sequins and platform boots to teen fans. By the time of Bolan’s death in 1977, many of his fans had switched their allegiance to the Sweet (“Little Willy,” “Ballroom Blitz,” “Fox on the 
r
un,” “Love Is Like 
o
xygen”).
The glam rocker who invested the music with its most lasting artistry and memorable 
theatrics was David Bowie. As glam historian Philip Auslander stated:
Bowie not only envisioned the rock concert as a stage, costumed, and choreographed theatrical  
performance, he understood his own performing and his relationship to his audience in actor’s 
terms rather than the communitarian terms that defined performance for psychedelic rockers.93
To a more elaborate degree than even Alice c ooper, Bowie—born 
David Jones—dispensed with rock’s usual concern with authenticity 
and instead concentrated on the invention of a stage persona, or rather  
a series of distinct personae, that bent the rules of conventional 
 
masculinity. Drawing on influences as diverse as mime, the Beat poets, 
Dylan, 
o
scar Wilde, and Andy Warhol, Bowie pointed the way to the 
future.
No artist marketed sexual ambiguity more successfully than 
Bowie did. 
o
riginally included in his 1969 album Man of Words, Man of Music, “Space 
o
ddity,” 
became his first Top Forty hit and, when reissued in 1973, established Bowie as an extraterres-trial, an outsider looking in. The original cover of his follow-up album, The Man Who Sold the World (1970), pictured the artist in drag but was withdrawn. In addition to tributes to Dylan 
and Warhol, Hunky Dory (1972) contained “
c
hanges” and “
o
h! You Pretty Things,” both of 
which celebrated the sexual subterfuge of glitter as a defining characteristic of the new coun-terculture and provided great copy for questions about Bowie’s own preferences. His chiseled good looks offset by orange hair and platform boots presented a most androgynous package. To a more elaborate degree than even 
Alice Cooper, Bowie dispensed with 
rock’s usual concern with authenticity 
and instead concentrated on the  
invention of a stage persona, or rather a 
 
series of distinct personae, that bent 
the rules of conventional masculinity.
244  rock IN ’ ou TListening Guide 21Considered by many to be the greatest of the glam-rock artists of the 
early 1970s, David Bowie’s music actually reveals a wide range of influ-
ences, from r&b to art rock, from disco to punk. “Changes” demonstrates 
his considerable ability to integrate seemingly disparate stylistic elements, 
which is one of his great strengths as an artist. The song was not a chart-topper at the time of its release, which is ironic considering that it ulti-mately became one of his best-known songs.
The lyrics of “Changes” seem to celebrate Bowie’s mercurial ap-
proach to both his public persona and his musical style. He is famous 
for having recreated himself a number of times: r&b saxophonist; ex-mod-
art-rocker; androgynous Ziggy Stardust glam-rock queen; the Thin White Duke of his self-described Plastic Soul period (which postdated “Changes”). Bowie’s lyrics are sophisticated, often personal (at least in reference to the character he’s currently inhabiting), and sometimes narrative. In “Changes,” he appears to be looking back at his own personal history, trying to come to grips with some thread of continuity running through the impermanence of our notions of self.
Musical Style Notes
Each section of “Changes” appropriately seems to morph from one musical style to another. The almost jazzy synthesizer 
introduction glides into a rhythm track with a New Orleans–style piano riff that recurs at various points in the song. The idiosyncratic, asymmetrical phrasing of the verse occurs over jazz-influenced chord changes, flowing seamlessly into a 
classic 1960s Kinks-style chorus (compare “Waterloo Sunset”), with its steady 1-2-3-4-1-2-3-4 beat and harmonized  
vocals, plus a call-and-response effect between the line “Turn and face the strange . . . ” and the word “Changes.” The catchy “Ch-ch-ch-ch” that begins the word “Changes” recalls the Who’s “My Ge-ge-ge-generation”; in both songs, the stuttering may be a subtle reference to “prellies,” the mods’ drug of choice, which often caused a kind of stuttering side 
effect. After a second jazz-influenced verse and “Ch-ch-ch-ch-Changes” chorus, the Kinks’ influence returns in the bridge, 
this is followed by another chorus. The song ends with a mellow, jazz-style sax solo over piano and bass. (Bowie began his musical career as a sax player.)
The other performers on “Changes” are guitarist Mick Ronson, bassist Trevor Bolder, drummer Mick Woodmansey, 
and keyboardist Rick Wakeman.
Musical “Road Map”
Timing S Commen TS 
0:00 Introduction: keyboard, synthesizer.
0:09 Entrance of rhythm track with New Orleans–style piano riff.
0:20 Verse 1
Vocals: jazz-influenced melody over synthesizer, piano, bass.
0:53 Chorus
1:12 Ending passage of chorus: Note how the voice and the instruments are all articulating in unison.
1:20 Transitional passage; New Orleans–style piano riff heard again.
1:29 Verse 2
2:01 Chorus
2:20 Return of unison passage that ends chorus.
2:27 Bridge section
2:42 Chorus
3:00 Return of unison passage that ends chorus; repeats.
3:12–3:31 Jazz sax coda (ending section) over synthesizer, piano, bass.“Changes”
Artist: David Bowie
Music/Lyrics by David BowieLabel: RCA (1971), from the LP  
Hunky Dory Mu SI c V E r S u S  M A rk ETS 245By 1972, Bowie was more than ready to inhabit his alien alter 
ego, Ziggy Stardust. The tour supporting the release of The 
Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars was a 
lavish glam rock extravaganza. During this period, Bowie an-
nounced his bisexuality. He continued projecting sexual am-biguity through other personae on Aladdin Sane (1973) and Diamond Dogs (1974).
c
redit for Bowie’s marketing triumph was due, at least 
in part, to his manager, Tony De Fries, who also managed Lou 
r
eed, Iggy Pop and the Stooges, and Mott the Hoople. This 
network placed Bowie in a line that led directly to punk and 
drew those other artists into the orbit of glam. Aladdin Sane  
included “Jean Genie,” a tribute that linked Iggy Pop with Jean Genet. In 1972, Bowie pro-
duced Iggy Pop’s Raw Power (not released until 1973) as well as Lou 
r
eed’s Transformer, which 
included 
r
eed’s only hit single, “Walk on the Wild Side,” a darkly focused paean to sexual 
adventurism. That same year, Bowie produced Mott the Hoople’s All the Young Dudes, which 
gave the group a new lease on life. The association with Bowie and the juxtaposition of the album’s title cut with songs like “
o
ne of the Boys” and Lou 
r
eed’s “Sweet Jane” (about a New 
York transvestite) located the straight (in all senses) rock group in the middle of the trendy unisexual aura of glam.
If Bowie drew 
u
.S. artists from the world of Warhol into the orbit of glam, other British 
acts used pop art principles to develop the style further. Bryan Ferry of 
r
oxy Music used 
“throwaway clichés and amusing phrases that you found in magazines” in his early lyrics.94 The 
group’s first single, “Virginia Plain” (1972), took its title from a brand of cigarettes. The cover 
of For Your Pleasure (1973) featured seductive, black satin–like surfaces. 
r
oxy Music’s early 
sound resulted from the tension (musical and otherwise) between Ferry and Brian Eno, who 
joined the group in 1971 as a “technical expert,” with no musical training. Eno’s input moved the music in a direction that held sound and style to a higher value than musicianship per se. After leaving 
r
oxy Music, Eno joined Bowie on a retreat to Berlin, where the two collaborated 
on three albums of avant-garde synth-pop.
Between his Ziggy Stardust period and his retreat to Berlin, Bowie went through a num-
ber of changes. In embracing the artificial, he had led the way from hippie idealism toward the eruption of punk. In 1975, he took another unexpected turn, swapping “the sci-fi future” of his glam period “for the uniform of white soul boy.”
95 After Diamond Dogs, he moved to 
Sigma Sound Studios in Philadelphia, the spiritual center of soft soul. There he recorded Young HEAR MORE
David Bowie on 
MySearchLab
With his androgynous good looks and flair for ambiguity, David 
Bowie elevated sexual subterfuge to an art form and provided critics with a seemingly endless list of questions regarding his 
own sexuality.246  rock IN ’ ou TAmericans, an album that Peter York would later describe as “avant-garde disco.”96 The title cut 
became a hit, and “Fame” provided Bowie with his first number one 
u
.S. single. Lou 
r
eed had 
anticipated the move in Sally Can’t Dance in 1974, but his outing was sandwiched between other 
experiments in heavy metal and white noise and no one noticed. It was Bowie who became the 
first white performer of note to straddle both punk and disco.
By the early 1970s, the established music industry, with its expanded infrastructure, had con-
solidated its hold over the rock and soul styles that grew out of the 1960s. Corresponding with the disintegration of the social movements that had defined the era, the music fragmented into a number of substyles. While the mellow sounds of singer/songwriters and Philadelphia soft soul tended to dominate the pop mainstream, there was another trajectory that led from hard rock to 
heavy metal to glam. In the fragmentation of popular music that ensued, audiences that might have overlapped in an earlier time were treated as discrete entities. This trend reached its zenith in the late 1970s in the emergence of punk and disco, whose audiences were viewed as mutually exclusive. Punk and disco were thus positioned as the two poles of pop that would define the ex-tremes of a decade in which rock began to lose its status as outsider art.
LEARN MORE
Chapter Questions on 
MySearchLab  247
8Punk and Disco:  
The Poles of Pop
When the U.S. music business passed the $2 billion  mark 
in the early 1970s, many assumed that sales would continue to climb in-
definitely. When the industry doubled in size between 1973 and 1978, 
surpassing $4 billion in annual sales in 1978, the assumption appeared 
to be correct. An era of mergers had consolidated the industry into a rationalized music machine built on the presumption that with sufficient 
promotional expense and radio exposure, any proven artist could almost guarantee millions of dollars in return. As the country’s leadership shifted from the lackluster and conservative 
 
Gerald Ford to the pleasant but largely ineffectual Jimmy Carter, the rock ‘n’ roll rebellion that had begun in the 1950s seemed, to many, on the verge of being tamed. Popular music was 
 
becoming centrist, corporate, and safe.
If popular music could be drawn as a bell curve, the center section would house a num-
ber of middle-of-the-road artists who borrowed soft rock styles for pop-sounding lounge acts. 
Beginning with “(They Long to Be) Close to You” in 1970, the Carpenters parlayed a combina-tion of rock covers and originals into twenty Top Forty hits in just over a decade. Barry Ma-nilow, formerly the piano accompanist in the gay bathhouse where Bette Midler got her start, produced twenty-five Top Forty singles and became one of the industry’s biggest stars. Neil Diamond topped both of them. Between 1970 and 1986, he scored thirty-six Top Forty singles and twenty gold and platinum albums. It is a telling commentary on the state of popular mu -
sic in the 1970s that the most popular singles for the years 1974, 1975, and 1976, respectively, were “The Way We Were” by Barbra Streisand, “Love Will Keep Us Together” by the Captain and Tennille, and “Silly Little Love Songs” by Paul Mc -
Cartney and Wings.
The pop rockers of the time were only slightly more adventurous. The album that domi-
nated the charts in 1976 was Peter Frampton’s Frampton Comes Alive! As a member of Humble Pie, Frampton had flirted with heavy metal; as a solo artist, he became a teen idol, more inter -
ested in melodic sweetness than volume. His first Top Thirty album, Frampton (1975), show-cased the songs that would become his major hits (“Show Me the Way,” “Baby, I Love Your 
LEARN MORE
Learning Objectives or 
My MusicKit248  ro CKIN ’ o UTWay,” “Do You Feel Like We Do”) as melodic rockers with an acoustic feel. Frampton Comes 
Alive! , which charted for nearly two years and sold over 10 million copies, made a nod toward 
his origins by including the same songs at hard rock volume.
Fleetwood Mac was a more mature version of these same rock 
tendencies. With their roots in John Mayall’s Bluesbreakers, Fleet-
wood Mac really gelled when Britons Mick Fleetwood and John and Christine McVie added the acoustic/electric guitar stylings and sweet harmonies of Americans Lindsay Buckingham and Stevie Nicks to the group. Their self-titled 1975 album hit number one, but it was 
 
Rumours 
(1977) that earned them a mythic place in rock lore. Rumours was a straight-ahead, upbeat pop rock album that hit number one and gener-ated four hit singles, including the number one “Dreams.” The album 
sold 10 million copies in the United States and 25 
 
million worldwide. 
When the group’s follow-up album, Tusk, sold 4 million copies, it was pretty ho-hum.
In the mid-1970s, the music industry was basking in sales figures like the ones outlined 
here. In 1976, the Eagles’ Hotel California sold 11 million copies. Also released that year, Stevie 
Wonder’s Songs in the Key of Life, Linda 
r
onstadt’s Hasten Down the Wind, Boz Scaggs’s Silk 
Degrees, and Boston’s Boston each sold more than 3 million copies. The platinum releases that year by Bob Dylan, Chicago, the Doobie Brothers, the 
r
olling Stones, Kansas, Ted Nugent, 
r
ush, Foghat, 
r
od Stewart, and Elton John seemed almost routine.
As a gay man, Elton John added a bit of camp to the mainstream. With his Presleyesque 
glitter tendencies and wild array of custom-made eyeglasses, John was like the Liberace of rock, inserting a bit of glam’s flair and showmanship during one of rock’s most colorless peri-
ods. Well before Blue Moves, his first platinum album, he was a bona fide rock star with seven 
number one albums, five of them in a row. With his long-time collaborator Bernie Taupin, he was also a prolific writer who captured the spirit of vintage rock ‘n’ roll with a sense of humor. Early standout hits like “
r
ocket Man,” “Crocodile 
r
ock,” “Goodbye Yellow Brick 
r
oad,” and 
“Bennie and the Jets” celebrated the entertainment value of a well-crafted song without suc-cumbing to the self-importance of art rock.
A few other artists also offered something in the way of rock artistry during this period. 
Billy Joel, a piano man like Elton John, was an intensely personal songwriter who was able to muster a bit of John’s flamboyance in concert. Like Bruce Springsteen, Joel added a rock edge to the craft of the singer/songwriter but projected a more conventional image. 
o
n The 
Stranger (1977) and 52nd Street (1978), which rose to numbers two and one, respectively, he created portraits of everyday life with drive and sophistication, laying the groundwork for a career that would carry him past the next decade. Borrowing from jazz, r&b, and rock, Steely Dan introduced a rare level of instrumental sophistication. Named after the dildo in William Burroughs’s Naked Lunch , Steely Dan was essentially a studio band founded by quirky writer/
instrumentalists Walter Becker and Donald Fagan, who assembled different side musicians for various album projects. Although the group rarely toured, their fluid rhythms, cryptic lyrics, and exacting production generated sales. Pretzel Logic (1974), Aja (1977), and Gaucho (1980) all went Top Ten.As the country’s leadership shifted 
from the lackluster and conservative 
Gerald Ford to the pleasant but largely 
ineffectual Jimmy Carter, the rock ‘n’ 
roll rebellion that had begun in the 1950s seemed, to many, on the verge of being tamed. Popular music was 
 
becoming centrist, corporate, and safe.
 P UNK  AND  D ISC o  249Aside from the creative energy of a few such artists, the center of rock had begun to take 
itself and its audience for granted. From the mid-1970s to well into the 1980s, groups like 
Bob Seger and the Silver Bullet Band, Foghat, 
r
E
o
 Speedwagon, and Journey converted hard 
rock into a predictable, pleasurable, well-oiled machine; Styx, Supertramp, and Kansas did the 
same while adding art-rock overtones. However, other styles of music still in their formative 
stages were positioned at the periphery of this cultural continuum; initially, few suitable venues existed for them and they were well beyond the pale of radio play. At one extreme stood punk; at the other, disco. In different ways and for different reasons, they would shake rock out of its complacency, at least for a time.
Punk Versus Disco
obvious distinctions separate disco and punk. Disco was smooth, sleek, and sensual; punk was 
dense, discordant, and defiant. Disco depended on technological sophistication and studio pro -
duction; punk’s three chords could be hammered out by any garage band. Disco dancers as-
pired to the controlled energy of the gymnast or the precision of group choreography; punks 
who pogoed or later slam danced approximated the antics of a tag-team wrestling match.  
“[P]ogo dancing—jumping up and down and flailing one’s arms,” observed Charles M. Young, “is as far as one can get from the Hustle.”
1 Disco proudly took its place among other black 
dance music styles. Rolling Stone’s Mikal Gilmore suggested that those “rock purists” who dis-
missed it as “a frivolous form of expression might do well to remember that rock & roll and 
rhythm & blues were dance styles, too, before they became art forms.”2 Punk’s aim was to de-
construct rock ‘n’ roll, bleeding it of its black rhythmic influences until only noise and texture 
remained. 
r
obert Christgau noted that punk “differentiates itself from its (fundamentally black 
and rural) sources by taking on the crude, ugly, perhaps brutal facts of the (white and urban) 
prevailing culture, rather than hiding behind its bland facade.”3 These differences were mir-
rored in fashion statements that pitted polyester leisure suits against black leather bondage 
gear and ripped T-shirts held together by safety pins.
Such blatant differences between disco and punk tended to obscure their similarities. 
Both were initially shunned by radio (albeit for different reasons) and forced to develop their 
own countercultural networks. Both were condemned as contributing to the destruction of Western civilization—punk with its nihilism, disco with its decadence. Both encouraged ac-tive—indeed, fanatical—participation among their audiences. Finally, both arose in reaction to the complacency of the music that preceded them. Compare, for example, Andrew Kopkind on disco with Simon Frith on punk. “Disco in the ‘70s is in revolt against rock in the ‘60s,” Kopkind explained. “Disco is ‘unreal,’ artificial, and exaggerated. It affirms the fantasies, gossip, frivolity, and fun of an evasive era.”
4 Frith, describing the impetus for punk, wrote,  
“[T]he reason why teenage music must be remade is because all the original rock ‘n’ rollers 
have become boring old farts, imprisoned by the routines of show biz….”5 The motivation 
and effect of both genres were the same—to intensify the feeling of the moment in an other-wise uncertain world.
250  ro CKIN ’ o UTYet most critics decried disco as escapist and embraced punk as politically progressive. 
According to Frith, “The return to rock ‘n’ roll roots is, in itself, a radical rejection of record 
company habits and punk’s musical simplicity is a political statement. 
The ideology of the garage band is an attack on the star system.”6 
Although disco spawned its own multibillion-dollar subindustry and 
punk barely registered a blip in sales, disco made no overt anti-estab-
lishment statement, while punk’s political possibilities, real or imag-
ined, captured the attention of rock critics who had cut their teeth on the political movements of the 1960s. As a result there has been considerable distortion in the way in which the histories of punk and disco have been recounted. As Andrew Kopkind complained in 1979, 
“John 
r
ockwell was still writing Hegelian analyses of the Sex Pistols in the Sunday Times  
when two-thirds of the city was listening to Donna Summer and couldn’t tell Mr. 
r
otten from 
Mr. 
r
espighi.”7
Although disco was seldom intentionally political, it may well have had a larger political 
impact than punk. The conflict between punk’s progressive urges and its flirtation with Nazi 
imagery often confounded its potential to pull people together. Disco brought people together 
across lines of race, class, and sexual preference, especially in the United States. In such a con-
text, anti-disco slogans like “Disco sucks” can be seen as racial (and sexual) epithets as much as statements of musical preference, and the systematic avoidance of disco by the rock critical establishment can be construed as racist. As Mikal Gilmore suggested in 1977:
[W]henever a phenomenon is given blanket dismissal, you can be sure something deeper is at work. And what’s 
going on here is that rock fans, like the proverbial cake, have been left out in the rain….[C]oincident with Saturday Night Fever, disco achieved anthem-like status with urban, working-class youth….[R]ock pride was 
wounded. Somehow, an entire grassroots movement had passed us by: No wonder Clash fans cry, “Disco sucks!”
8
By the time the decade ended, disco had swamped the music business and punk had im-
ploded. While disco would collapse shortly thereafter, punk would be born again as new wave, 
incorporating a wide range of influences that even included disco.
Punk: Rock as (White) Noise
Until recently, the tendency to focus on punk’s political impact corresponded with the tendency to emphasize its British origins. This is because punk’s arrival in Britain coincided with right-wing advances and decaying social conditions, which gave the music a more critical political 
edge. In the United States, where the Carter presidency offered a brief respite from the preced-
ing eight years of conservative government, punk was less disruptive and more easily incorpo-rated into the mainstream music industry.
In putting punk’s most political foot forward, many observers look first to the Sex 
 
Pistols, 
a British group that caused a political furor in their country even before releasing their first sin-gle in 1976. While political impact is one valid measure of the importance of a cultural form, it is not the best way to trace its origins. The emergence of U.S. punk, in fact, predates its British 
SEE MORE
Punk documentary on 
My MusicKitAlthough disco spawned its own 
multibillion-dollar subindustry and punk 
barely registered a blip in sales, disco 
made no overt anti-establishment state-
ment, while punk’s political possibilities, real or imagined, captured the atten-tion of rock critics who had cut their 
teeth on the political movements of the 
1960s.
 P UNK  AND  D ISC o  251eruption by nearly two years. While the Sex Pistols may have set the standard in  England, 
their debut album, Never Mind the Bollocks, never registered on the Top Forty album or singles 
charts in the United States. Indeed, it was rare in the United States for any punk group to tran-
scend cult status, much less to have a hit record. This fact underscores one of the most salient 
features of the punk movement: Its myth was always more powerful than its reality.
Central to the myth of the Sex Pistols was Malcolm McLaren, the group’s manager. 
McLaren fancied himself a Machiavellian manipulator with a master plan to use the power of the music industry against itself in the service of radical social change. In fact, he was never a com-mitted activist. He was fascinated, however, by the 1968 student revolts in Paris and influenced by the tactics of the French Situationists, who created media-savvy situations as a way of trans-forming everyday life. He and his partner, Vivienne Westwood, owned a clothing store, catering first to impeccably attired teddy boys and then leather-clad rockers, as each became fashionable. 
Despite McLaren’s claim to have created the Sex Pistols, the group’s guitarist, Steve Jones, and its drummer, Paul Cook, had already started a group called the Strand (named after the 
r
oxy 
Music song) before they met McLaren. Jones and Cook afterward sought out McLaren to be their manager (bassist Glen Matlock joined later). Complicating the picture was the addition of singer John Lydon (Johnny 
r
otten), who would vie with McLaren for control of the group until 
the end. Lydon couldn’t sing and had no sense of rhythm, but ac-cording to Rolling Stone’s Charles M. Young, he had three qualities 
to recommend him: “1) his face had the pallor of death; 2) he went around spitting on poseurs he passed on the street; and 3) he was the first to understand the democratic implications of punk.”
9 At 
the time Lydon joined the group, McLaren and Westwood had reopened their store as a shop 
called Sex—hence the group’s name. At that point, McLaren saw the Sex Pistols more as a ve-
hicle for selling T-shirts and trousers than as point men in an anarchist revolt.
McLaren claimed that, before the Sex Pistols, he had managed the New York Dolls. In 
fact, he met the Dolls in 1973, when they were already the toast of the underground, and 
became obsessed with the group, joining them on their European tour later that year. By the fall of 1974, the group was in disarray, beset by drug addiction and the failure to live up to the high expectations that had surrounded them. McLaren tried to do right by the group, finding hospitals and drug treatment programs, but in the end he simply orchestrated the Dolls’ last gasp. He dressed the group in red patent leather with hammer-and-sickle flags for a backdrop and sent the press a manifesto rather than an invitation to their upcoming shows. “
o
ut went 
Glam, in came Communism,” said historian Jon Savage.10 By most accounts, the band was tight, 
but with no substance to their posture; their newest attempt at outrage had no beneficial effect. 
“You get beat up for being a fag,” observed photographer Bob Gruen, “but you get killed for be-
ing a Commie.”11 Metaphorically speaking, this is exactly what happened to the Dolls, as their 
three-year run at celebrity abruptly came to a halt.
Born in the U.S.A.
During the descent of the Dolls, New York trash rock had gotten considerably more stripped 
down. As 1973 turned into 1974, club owner Hilly Kristal was reopening his Bowery hangout HEAR MORE
Malcolm McLaren on 
MySearchLabMcLaren saw the Sex Pistols more as 
a vehicle for selling T-shirts and trou-
sers than as point men in an anarchist 
revolt.
252  ro CKIN ’ o UTfor bikers and winos as a country music bar called Country Blue Grass and Blues (CBGB). 
Tom Verlaine and 
r
ichard Lloyd from the band Television convinced Kristal to book under-
ground rock acts instead. Within months, CBGB had become the heart of the New York rock 
underground. Its only competition was Max’s Kansas City. By the time McLaren returned to 
New York to preside over the Dolls’ demise, Hilly Kristal was hosting the scene that would yield Patti Smith, Blondie, the 
r
amones, and the Talking Heads.
The first wave of punk rockers on both sides of the ocean recognized the important leg-
acy of the Velvet Underground and Iggy Pop and the Stooges from the 1960s. At the poles of the Velvet Underground’s creative axis were Lou 
r
eed and John Cale. The Brooklyn-born 
r
eed appeared to be your average college student; he liked a range of music from doo wop and 
rhythm and blues to jazz. After college, he became an assembly-line songwriter at 
 
Pickwick 
r
ecords. Cale had a degree in classical music; his tastes ran to the avant-garde sounds of 
 
Stockhausen, John Cage, and La Monte Young. The buzzsaw sound of Cale’s modified electric 
viola became an early Velvet trademark and an inspiration to a generation of punks. 
r
ounding 
out the band were guitarist Sterling Morrison and drummer Maureen Tucker.
The Velvet Underground’s repertoire, instrumentation, and avant-garde excursions 
into feedback and white noise were in place before their fabled association with Andy 
 
Warhol 
 
began. Warhol gave the group a slot at the Factory (his umbrella for diverse multimedia proj-
ects), which was undoubtedly the best offer a band with material like “Heroin” and “Black 
 
Angel’s Death Song” could get in 1966. His only direct intervention was to install the striking 
 
Hungarian-born blonde singer Nico in the band as a more visually appealing focal point than 
the deadpan 
r
eed. In 1966, the group joined Warhol’s touring multimedia show, the 
 
Exploding 
Plastic Inevitable. The next year saw the release of The Velvet Underground and Nico, with a 
Warhol-designed yellow banana on the cover.
Iggy Pop (born James 
o
sterberg) was raised in Ypsilanti and Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
where he spent his high school years playing drums in bands like the Iguanas, from which he adopted the nickname “Iggy.” After a stint in Chicago seeking to play straight electric blues, he returned to Michigan, and founded the Psychedelic Stooges (later, the Stooges) in 1967 with brothers 
r
on and Scott Asheton on guitar and drums—Iggy at this point having moved to 
vocals.12 By this time, he had developed a style that, according to MC5 manager John Sinclair, 
“had gone beyond performance—to the point where it was really some kind of psychodrama.”13 
The Stooges’ material was resolutely confrontational, but Pop mixed an unsettling stage per-
sona with genuine charisma, and the rest of the band developed a distinct, untutored power.
A year after forming, the Stooges were signed to Elektra. Manager Danny Fields’s 
choice of John Cale to produce their first album created a direct link between the Stooges and 
the Velvet Underground. Iggy drew sensational notices for his seemingly self-destructive on-stage behavior, such as the 1970 gig where he drew blood by throwing himself onto a shattered glass. Yet he also, importantly, challenged the boundary between performer and audience in a way that other stars of the time were too timid to do. Lester Bangs wrote: “[Iggy] enters the audience frequently to see what’s what and even from the stage his eyes reach out searchingly, sweeping the joint and singling out startled strangers who’re seldom able to stare him down.”
14 
His compelling presence combined with the elemental throb of the Stooges’ music made the 
band pivotal precursors of punk. P UNK  AND  D ISC o  253By the end of the 1960s, the Velvet Underground had released two more albums—White 
Light/White Heat, which included their classic seventeen-minute tale of horror, “Sister 
r
ay,” 
and The Velvet Underground—and Elektra had issued the Stooges’ self-titled debut album. So 
few venues would book either act, however, that it was almost impossible to promote their re-
leases. By the early 1970s, the Stooges had disbanded and, of the original Velvet Underground, only Sterling Morrison remained. Two years later, David Bowie convinced the Stooges to re-unite, but they could never keep it together for very long. By the time CBGB took off in 1974, the Stooges and the Velvet Underground had more value as historical referents than as current practitioners.
Another line of development leading to punk came from the realm of rock criticism. In 
the early 1970s, critics such as Bangs, Greg Shaw, Dave Marsh, and Lenny Kaye expressed their dissatisfaction with the dominant rock trends by looking back to the music of the 1960s 
in an effort to rediscover lost sounds. They were drawn to scores of lesser-known bands such as the Troggs, the Standells, the Count Five, and the Thirteenth Floor Elevators—groups that played with an amateurish drive that went against the more polished sounds that rock assumed as it became art music, on the one hand, and high-powered commodity, on the other. By the time Lenny Kaye assembled the influential 1972 compilation of mid-1960s rock, Nuggets, he and other critics were calling this rediscovered music “punk rock,” using the term to capture the sense of untamed youthful abandon they believed it to project.
15
When a more current incarnation of punk came into its own in the mid 1970s, many of 
the qualities supported by these critics carried forward. Punk was simple, against the increas-
ing complexity of other rock and pop forms. It was meant to be a bottom-up phenomenon, not 
something that came from the top down. The noise of punk 
came as much from the amateurish or calculatedly dissonant musicianship as from brandishing the usual rock tools of vol-ume and distortion. Punk politics was, if anything, the poli-tics of refusal: the refusal to conform; the refusal to act with decorum; and the refusal of the idea that virtuosity was nec-essary to make good music. Aside from this fragile unity, the most distinctive thing about the early New York punk groups was just how different they were from each other. Consider, for example, Patti Smith’s spoken-word rock poetry and mannish attire versus Blondie’s breathy 
pop and lead-singer Deborah Harry’s peroxide persona; the 
r
amones’ bikers-on-speed sound 
and image versus the preppiness of the Talking Heads. The group that paved the way for these opposites was Television.
Television, the first noteworthy CBGB group, arose from the partnership of aspiring 
artist-musicians Tom Verlaine and 
r
ichard Hell. A guitarist, Verlaine cited the 
r
olling Stones, 
John Coltrane, and the free jazz of Albert Ayler among his influences, and valued musical craft even as he generated cacophony. Bassist Hell favored a less refined, more spontaneous approach to musicianship. Anticipating punk’s anti-glam, anti-hippie fashion, Hell supplied Television’s look—torn-up T-shirts and close-cropped hair. He also contributed the punk classic “Blank Generation”—an answer song of sorts to the Who’s “My Generation.” The song was taken as an early indicator of punk nihilism, but Hell insisted that its message was misunderstood: 
“To me, ‘blank’ is a line where you can fill in anything. It’s positive.”
16 By the time Television Punk politics was, if anything, the poli-
tics of refusal: the refusal to conform; 
the refusal to act with decorum; and the 
refusal of the idea that virtuosity was 
necessary to make good music.
254  ro CKIN ’ o UTreleased its first independent single, “Little Johnny Jewel” (1975), tension between Verlaine 
and Hell had forced the latter out of the group. In 1977, a reconstituted Television recorded the album Marquee Moon, featuring the intricate interplay of Verlaine and co-guitarist 
r
ichard 
Lloyd. That same year, Hell committed “Blank Generation” to an eponymous album with his 
new group, the Voidoids.
Patti Smith was the first artist associated with CBGB to become famous. 
r
aised in 
New Jersey, Smith moved to New York in 1967, where she met the gay photographer 
 r
obert 
 
Mapplethorpe, who became her closest artistic companion—and would later photograph her for the cover of her first album.
17 She and Mapplethorpe took up residence at the Chelsea  Hotel, 
then frequented by Warhol and William Burroughs, among others. Smith gained 
 
attention as 
a poet and a rock journalist, writing primarily for Creem and Rolling Stone. She also began 
performing her work, accompanied on electric guitar by fellow writer-musician Lenny Kaye. 
Smith drew upon an unruly mix of influences that included Bob Dylan, Jimi Hendrix, Keith 
r
ichards, and the French symbolist poet Arthur 
r
imbaud. With the subsequent addition of 
pianist 
r
ichard Sohl, she and Kaye began to approximate the amalgam of free verse and impro-
visatory rock with which Smith would become identified.
The trio recorded their first single, “Piss Factory” backed with “Hey Joe” (1974), with 
Tom Verlaine on lead guitar. “Piss Factory” was an autobiographical account of the horrors of factory work; the meaning of “Hey Joe” was transformed by an introductory poem about Patty Hearst’s exploits with the Symbionese Liberation Army. The single’s release coincided with 
Smith and Television sharing a memorable residency at Max’s Kansas City. In the spring of 1975, the same double bill confirmed CBGB as New York’s premiere rock club and, around that time, the Patti Smith Group was signed to Arista. By the time Horses was released in 1976, the group had added Ivan Kral on bass and Jay Dee Daugherty on drums, with John Cale as pro-ducer. Horses  was not only the first punk album 
of note, it was one of the few to enter the Top Fifty. Smith, whose trademark of a man’s white shirt and tie suggested new roles for women, was well on the way to stardom when she fell off a ten-foot stage and broke her neck. Easter  
(1978), the album that marked her return, in-
cluded the decidedly unpunk hit single “Because 
the Night,” supplied by Bruce Springsteen.
In 1974, while Television and Patti Smith 
were in residence at Max’s, the 
r
amones and 
Patti Smith recorded the first punk album of note. Her an-
drogynous attire, bohemian lifestyle, and successful fusion of rock and poetry suggested the possibility of new direc-
tions for music and new roles for women.
 P UNK  AND  D ISC o  255Blondie made their debuts at CBGB. The r amones were comprised of four middle-class kids 
from Forest Hills, Queens. Jeff Hyman (Joey), John Cummings (Johnny), Doug Colvin (Dee 
Dee), and Tom Erdelyi (Tommy) each adopted “
r
amone” (Paul McCartney’s first pseudonym) 
as his surnom de punk. Unlike other punk groups, the 
r
amones played only original material. 
“We couldn’t figure out how to play anybody else’s songs,” explained Johnny.18 Stylistically, 
they stripped rock ‘n’ roll naked with unadorned, rapid-fire guitar bursts, pneumatic drumming, and abrupt, minimalist lyrics rarely longer than eight lines. The 
r
amones filled in the blank of 
r
ichard Hell’s generation with a repertoire of refusal, including “I Don’t Care,” “I Don’t Wanna 
Be Learned, I Don’t Wanna Be Tamed,” and “I Don’t Wanna Go Down to the Basement.” “We 
didn’t write a positive song until ‘Now I Wanna Sniff Some Glue,’” Dee Dee later quipped.19 The 
band usually ran through a set with dizzying speed, with few songs longer than two minutes.
Critical praise—in the SoHo Weekly, Rock Scene, Hit Parader, and the Village Voice—was 
not long in coming. When London’s New Musical Express did its first spread on the New York punk scene in 1975, the 
r
amones were the featured artists. Danny Fields, who had formerly 
managed the Stooges, saw them play at CBGB and immediately offered his services. He recalled: “They were the perfect band. They were fast and I liked fast. Beethoven quartets are HEAR MORE
The Ramones on My 
MusicKitThe Ramones played faster songs with shorter lyrics than anyone connected 
to the New York punk scene. Their rapid-fire delivery pointed the way for 
 
British punk.
256  ro CKIN ’ o UT
Listening Guide 22Higher, faster, louder, briefer—it’s the Ramones!
The Ramones were, at the same time, the simplest and, one might say, 
the most abstract of punk bands. Recognizing their own musical limita-
tions, they set out to recover the brevity, simplicity, and hammer-headed di-
rectness of earlier “punks” like Jerry Lee and Elvis. Though some thought 
they came across as complete knuckleheads, their musical style and ethos make great sense as a sly-yet-ferocious assault on the bloated, late 1970s art rock. Where art rock was deemed pretentious, the Ramones were defi-
antly modest. Where art rock sought symphonic breadth and staged extrava-
ganzas, the Ramones kept everything short (their sets at New York’s famed CBGB’s club rarely exceeded a half hour). Where art rock was ruled by banks of pedals and stacks of electronic keyboards, the Ramones kept it to the guitars, the chords, and the (deafeningly loud) amps. The uncomplicated yet defiant lyrics are vaguely political, yet not nearly as direct an affront as those sung by groups like the Sex Pistols or as consciously intellectual as punk poets like Patti Smith. Not by accident, the Ramones also borrowed the straightforward forms, repetitive melodies, and pounding four-on-the-floor rhythms of surf music.
“I Don’t Wanna Be Learned, I Don’t Wanna Be Tamed” was originally recorded as a demo. It was included as a 
bonus track on Rhino’s rerelease of the 1976 LP The Ramones.
Musical Style Notes
The structure of “I Don’t Wanna Be Learned, I Don’t Wanna Be Tamed” couldn’t be more straightforward: three twelve-bar 
sections, the second and third of which contain lyrics sung over the first eight bars, followed by the first four bars played instrumentally. The abrupt ending sounds sudden because the harmonic resolution to this point has been coming at  
the end of the twelve-bar form, and they never get there (but then, that’s the whole point). The entire song lasts only  
one minute.
The sound characteristics—driving drum hits on every beat, loud and extremely distorted guitars, and unpolished 
vocals—are all typical of early punk rock, New York style. The ersatz British accents, on the other hand, were a Ramones 
specialty.
Musical “Road Map”
Timings Commen T s
0:00–0:01 Countdown
0:01–0:18 Introduction, instrumental, 12 bars
0:18–0:34 Verse
Same form as introduction
Lyrics last 8 bars, 4-bar instrumental transition into next “verse.”
0:34–0:51 Verse
Exactly the same as 0:18–0:34
0:51–1:00 Instrumental, consisting of the 8-bar verse, but with no lyrics sung—song ends abruptly where the sung verse would have ended.“I Don’t Wanna Be Learned, I 
Don’t Wanna Be Tamed”
Artist: The Ramones
Music/Lyrics by The RamonesLabel: Rhino, 2001 rerelease of 
The Ramones  (1976) P UNK  AND  D ISC o  257supposed to be slow. r ock & roll is supposed to be fast.”20 Sire r ecords signed the group—the 
second punk act after Patti Smith to secure a record contract. Seymour Stein of Sire played a 
pivotal role in developing punk, eventually also signing the Talking Heads, the Dead Boys, 
r
ichard Hell and the Voidoids, and the Pretenders.
The 
r
amones’ eponymous debut album (1976) delivered all the manic energy of the 
group’s live performances. The album bombed in the United States but was the talk of 
 
London, 
at least in part because there was no similar domestic product. 
Their second album, Leave Home (1977), did even more poorly in the United States than their first, but it cracked the Top Fifty in Great Britain and yielded a hit single there, “Sheena Is a Punk 
r
ocker.” Although the 
r
amones pointed the way for British bands, 
it was not until Rocket to Russia (1978) that the group finally broke 
into the U.S. Top 100 LPs. By this time, British punk/new wave was in full swing, and London had overtaken New York as the cut-ting edge of the new trend.
Blondie also found London to be the best launching pad for 
success in the United States. Singer Deborah Harry and guitarist Chris Stein formed the group (named after the comic strip character) from the remains of their former band, the Stilettos. Between their CBGB debut and their first LP , bassist Fred Smith left to join Television, Ivan Kral was stolen by Patti Smith, and drummer Billy 
o
’Connor quit to go to law school. Thus, 
the five-piece lineup on Blondie’s self-titled debut album (on the Private Stock label) included only Harry and Stein from the original group. The addition of Jimmy Destri on Farfisa organ gave the group a distinctive camp feel that harkened back to the pop sounds of the 1960s. Al-
though the album did not generate a ripple in U.S. sales, it brought the group to the attention 
of Chrysalis, which purchased their contract for $500,000. After modest sales for their second album, Plastic Letters, Blondie hired Mike Chapman, formerly of the British hit-making team of 
Chinn and Chapman, to produce Parallel Lines (1978), which marked the group’s breakthrough in the United States. It peaked at number six and included the disco-influenced number one single, “Heart of Glass.”
Although the Talking Heads, like other first-generation groups, were formed in 1974, 
and although they achieved mass market success in the United States before either Blondie or the 
r
amones, they are sometimes considered apart from the first wave of CBGB groups. As of 
their 1975 debut, they already knew how to play; their sets had structure, even rigidity; and they embraced rhythm and blues as a strong element in their otherwise pop rock sound. Still, their presentation was sufficiently minimalist and self-conscious to earn them a place on the art rock side of punk.
The Talking Heads had begun to take shape at the 
r
hode Island School of Design in 
1973, when guitarist/vocalist David Byrne and drummer Chris Frantz formed the Artistics. The following year, they—along with Tina Weymouth, Frantz’s girlfriend—headed for New York, where the CBGB scene reignited their desire to play music. With Weymouth on bass, they were an instant hit. Hilly Kristal loved them; the press loved them; other groups were jealous of them. Within two months of their debut, they were headlining with the 
r
amones; 
the following year, they signed with the 
r
amones’ label, Sire. Before recording their first Although the Ramones pointed the 
way for British bands, it was not until 
Rocket to Russia (1978) that the group 
finally broke into the U.S. Top 100 LPs. 
By this time, British punk/new wave was in full swing, and London had over-taken New York as the cutting edge of 
the new trend.
258  ro CKIN ’ o UTsingle, “Love Goes to Building on Fire” (1976), they added Jerry Harrison, a keyboardist from 
the proto-punk band the Modern Lovers. Talking Heads ‘77, the group’s first album, made it into the Top 100. Although primarily a pop-sounding LP , singles like “Psycho Killer” showed 
an ironic punk edge. Their next three albums were produced by Brian Eno, who would see 
them through the punk era into the next decade. More Songs About Buildings and Food (1978) included a Top Thirty cover of Al Green’s “Take Me to the 
r
iver” that showcased the Talking 
Heads’ affinity for African American music, a cornerstone of their sound in the 1980s.
By the time the Talking Heads played their first CBGB gig, it was apparent that New 
York was not the only punk mecca in the United States. When the New York well ran dry for the Velvet Underground in the late 1960s, a Boston club called the Boston Tea Party became their second home. In fact, Boston’s Modern Lovers, led by Jonathan 
r
ichman, were the first 
band to embrace the Velvet Underground fully, and their first album—recorded in 1972 but 
not released until 1976—was produced by John Cale. Los Angeles gave rise to an active punk scene starting in 1977, with bands like the Weirdos, the Screamers, and X evincing a distinct bohemian sensibility, while the Germs anticipated the later shift from punk to hardcore with their faster-than-fast songs and singer Darby Crash’s skewed lyrical sensibility. To the north, San Francisco gave rise to two notable female-fronted bands, the Nuns (featuring Jennifer Miro) and the Avengers (featuring Penelope Houston).
In the Midwest, Cleveland housed a burgeoning proto-punk scene in the early 1970s. 
The Mirrors, the Electric Eels, and 
r
ocket from the Tombs all began there. While the Mirrors 
and the Eels faded, the 
r
ockets split into two groups that earned places in punk history: Pere 
Ubu (“Thirty Seconds over Tokyo,” “Life Stinks,” “Final Solution”) and the Dead Boys (“Sonic 
r
educer”). Devo (from devolution) was formed in nearby Akron, 
o
hio, by art students from Combining breathy pop vocals with a Marilyn Monroe persona, Blondie’s 
Deborah Harry added disco and rap influences to punk.
 P UNK  AND  D ISC o  259Kent State University in 1972. With inverted flowerpot hats and jerky robotic movements de -
fining their image, Devo was signed to Virgin in 1978, and Brian Eno was recruited to produce 
their first album, Are We Not Men? We Are Devo! 
o
ne of Devo’s first singles, “Jocko Homo,” and 
their punk send-up of the 
r
olling Stones’ “Satisfaction” were hits in Britain, but the group re-
mained a cult item in the United States until the next decade.
“Anarchy in the U.K.”
CBGB showcased over thirty new groups at its 1975 Festival of Unsigned Bands months be-fore Britain’s Sex Pistols played their first gig. But while punk developed earlier in the United States, the social conditions that engendered it were more pro-
foundly disturbing in Britain. Unemployment had reached record 
highs, and the country was in its deepest recession since World War II. Although the Labor Party attempted to respond to these onslaughts, the fascist National Front was growing stronger and the conservative Margaret Thatcher had become prime minister. The optimism of the postwar years was giving way to cynicism, and the consensus of values that had regulated social and political life was coming unraveled.
In such a climate, even the name Sex Pistols, with its obvious connections to youth, vio-
lence, and sex, caused a stir. Therefore, finding suitable venues was a problem from the mo-
ment they started performing in 1975. The pub rock scene was dominated by Dr. Feelgood, the Stranglers, and Eddie and the Hot 
r
ods—groups who played loud, fast, aggressive rock 
but who never quite made it into the inner circle of punk. The Pistols’ initial tour of Britain was staged mostly in college venues, and attendance seldom reached triple figures. Still, by the summer of 1976, they were building a following, assisted by the enthusiastic reports of Melody Maker journalist Caroline Coon. Then, in Manchester, the Sex Pistols unleashed “ Anarchy in the U.K.”—the call to arms that would establish them as the vanguard group in a nationwide movement. Manchester led to an appearance on Granada TV’s So It Goes, where they again performed “ Anarchy in the U.K.,” this time on national television.
This performance inspired Joe Strummer, a guitarist for a group called the 101ers, who 
had taken their name from the number of the torture room in George 
o
rwell’s 1984. With 
the guidance of manager Bernie 
r
hodes, a colleague of McLaren’s, Strummer teamed up with 
Mick Jones and Paul Simonon from another group (London SS) to form the Clash. The group took its name from the word used most often in tabloid headlines about class and race relations in Britain. If, as Jon Savage has suggested, “[p]unk’s breakthrough was to unite people who saw pop in terms of social realism and those who viewed it as artistic expression,” the Clash, more than any other group, took social(ist) realism to its artistic and political limits.
21 The 
group was the Sex Pistols’ major competition and, in fact, outlasted them by years.
The Clash seemed more grounded in the real world than other punk groups and far more 
likely to take up the cry of the British working class. While the Sex Pistols explored nihilism 
with songs like “Pretty Vacant,” “Seventeen,” “Problems,” and “Submission,” the Clash were more socially engaged, with material such as “I’m So Bored with the U.S.A.,” a searing commentary CBGB showcased over thirty new 
groups at its 1975 Festival of Unsigned 
Bands months before Britain’s Sex 
Pistols played their first gig. But while 
punk developed earlier in the United States, the social conditions that engen-dered it were more profoundly disturb-
ing in Britain.
260  ro CKIN ’ o UT
John Lydon/Rotten understood, better than anyone in rock ‘n’ roll 
since John Lennon, the way that one generation’s scandal could be the 
next generation’s opportunity. Just as Lennon had told a Command  
 
Performance audience to “rattle your jewelry” in lieu of applause, 
 
Rotten 
had sung that Queen Elizabeth II “ain’t no human being.” Both were 
purely symbolic acts—working-class anger masquerading as mere  
impudence—but both carried a powerful symbolic message. Neither of 
these “angry young men” was prepared to accept the previous genera-
tion’s sense of propriety, and each built a career out of calculated (and 
 
brilliantly musical) outrage. Both Lennon and Lydon saw rock ‘n’ roll as a way out—and a chance for a few swipes at 
the ruling class along the way.
The players in this 1976 incarnation of the Sex Pistols were Johnny Rotten (a.k.a. John Lydon), vocals; Steve 
Jones, guitar; Glen Matlock, bass; and Paul Cook, drums. “Anarchy in the U.K.” was released as a single in 1976 and was also included on the LP Never Mind the Bollocks, Here’s the Sex Pistols.
Musical Style Notes
The driving, drum-hit-on-every-beat and the high-volume guitar distortion of the Sex Pistols place them squarely in the sonic 
category of punk rock, but claims that the Sex Pistols were unable to play their instruments are highly exaggerated. The mu-sical structure of “Anarchy” is not simplistic, but it contains a typical verse-chorus pop-song construction with two contrasting 
guitar solo sections. While it may rely on the three primary chords in a major key—what musicians call I, IV , and V—it’s no 
less harmonically sophisticated than many blues songs or British invasion–style songs from the previous decade. The most frequent chord progression here (the one you hear while Johnny’s singing “I am an antichrist”) is a frantic, sped-up version of the same chord progression that repeats endlessly in Muddy Waters’ “I’m a Man,” although the distortion and the different 
rhythm may render it unrecognizable. The first guitar solo is played over a completely different set of chords (for musicians, 
the II and III chord in the key). The second guitar solo modulates (changes key) a whole step and is an almost complete replica, whether intentionally or not, of the guitar part from the Searchers’ 1964 hit “Needles and Pins” (which, interestingly enough, was also covered by the Ramones in 1978). Rotten’s lyric style may be confrontational and coarse, but his delivery is impeccable and “in sync” with the rhythm and the harmonic changes of the music, right down to the last snarl.
Musical “Road Map”
Timings Commen T s
0:00–0:06 Instrumental introduction
0:06–0:14 Instrumental introduction
0:14–0:28 Verse 1
0:28–0:43 Chorus
0:43–1:00 Verse 2
1:00–1:12 Chorus
1:12–1:31 Guitar solo 1
1:31–1:45 Verse 3
1:45–2:00 Chorus
2:00–2:14 Guitar solo 2 (“Needles and Pins” quote)
2:14–2:29 Verse 4
2:29–2:43 (Chorus, with new words)
2:43–3:11 Chorus (four times)“Anarchy in the U.K.”
Artist: The Sex Pistols
Music/Lyrics by Paul Cook, Steve 
Jones, Glen Matlock, and Johnny Rotten
Label: EMI (1976)Listening Guide 23 P UNK  AND  D ISC o  261Johnny Rotten’s minimalist attire, hostile 
stage presence, and painful engagement with his music captured the aesthetic of 
the Sex Pistols.
on popular culture; and “White r iot,” 
stirred by clashes between young blacks 
and police at the Notting Hill Carnival. 
In the spirit of punk, the Clash’s “1977” 
proclaimed an end to Elvis, the Beatles, and the 
r
olling Stones, but the group also 
took on the issues of racism (“Police and Thieves”), unemployment (“Career 
o
ppor-
tunities”), and class (“What’s My Name”).
Perhaps oddly for radical punks, 
both the Sex Pistols and the Clash aspired to major label status. Meanwhile, Stiff 
r
e-
cords, a British independent founded in 
1976 by two pub rock entrepreneurs, Dave 
r
obinson and Andrew Jakeman (a.k.a. Jake 
r
iviera), provided an early home to other 
punk groups. 
r
obinson had managed 
Brinsley Schwarz, a pub rock group, and 
Graham Parker, whose intense r&b sound (Howlin’ Wind , 1976) straddled the fence between pub rock and punk. Brinsley vocalist Nick 
Lowe became Stiff ’s house producer and an artist in his own right. He eventually supervised all of Elvis Costello’s early work, with 
r
iviera doubling as Costello’s manager. Stiff signed the 
Damned, an apolitical group whose members liked speed and noise. They were the first unmis-
takably punk group to land a record contract in Britain and the first to hit the Top Thirty with 
“New 
r
ose,” about an amphetamine rush. The Vibrators, another Stiff group that was equally 
lacking in moral authority, recorded the slightly off-color “We Vibrate.”
The Damned appeared, along with headliners the Sex Pistols, the Clash, the Buzzcocks, 
the Vibrators, and Siouxsie and the Banshees, at the Punk 
r
ock Festival, which was staged at 
London’s 100 Club in September 1976. The last group was assembled at the last minute from Sex Pistols hangers-on including vocalist Siouxsie Sioux; Sid Vicious, who later joined the Pistols; and Marco Pirroni, who joined Adam Ant. The Punk 
r
ock 
Festival was plagued by technical difficulties, professional rivalries, political differences, violence, and several arrests. In short, it was a roaring success.
Scandal would continue to shadow the Sex Pistols and the 
larger punk phenomenon. After signing with EMI, the Pistols The Punk Rock Festival was plagued by 
technical difficulties, professional rival-
ries, political differences, violence, and 
several arrests. In short, it was a roaring 
success.
262  ro CKIN ’ o UTreleased “ Anarchy in the U.K.” as a single 
in November 1976. A tour with the Clash, the Damned, and Johnny 
 
Thunders’ 
Heartbreakers was planned to promote 
the record. In December, however, the Sex Pistols were interviewed on Thames TV’s Today show by Bill Grundy, who 
goaded Steve Jones into calling him a “dirty fucker” and a “fucking rotter” on the air. In the aftermath, deejays across Great Britain (with the notable exception of John Peel) refused to play the song, 
and most planned tour dates were can-celed. Even so, with sales of more than 50,000, “ Anarchy in the U.K.” entered the Top Twenty before Christmas.
By this time records by other punk 
groups were starting to multiply. In Manchester, the Buzzcocks issued an EP called “Spiral Scratch” on their own New Hormones label; they sold 15,000 cop-ies. Stiff signed a distribution deal with Island 
r
ecords just in time to push the 
Damned’s first album, Damned Damned Damned, into the U.K. Top Forty. United Artists had already signed the Stranglers, and Polydor had picked up the Jam. The biggest news, however, was that, in March 1977, the Clash had signed with CBS for a £100,000 advance. The Clash’s self-titled debut album (1977) clearly stamped punk with the imprint of social realism and was, in the words of Jon Savage, “the first major Punk statement.”
22 Unfortunately, it went unreleased 
in the United States for two years. Not until the beginning of the 1980s did the Clash fare well 
in the U.S. market. London Calling (1980) and Sandinista! (1981) charted Top Thirty and Combat 
Rock (1982) went Top Ten, yielding the group’s only U.S. Top Ten single, “
r
ock the Casbah.”
While CBS was promoting the Clash, McLaren scrambled for a new contract for the Sex 
Pistols after EMI dropped the band following the Grundy interview. A&M signed the band 
and then promptly dropped them, leaving McLaren to make a deal with Virgin. By this time, Sid Vicious had replaced Glen Matlock on bass. In 1977, Queen Elizabeth II’s silver jubilee provided the perfect opportunity for the Sex Pistols to reassert their primacy. They planned With material that focused on working 
class themes and issues, the Clash had their sights set on nothing short of a so-
cialist revolution through music.
 P UNK  AND  D ISC o  263to release “God Save the Queen” (recorded immediately after the Virgin signing), which baldly 
accused the monarchy of being a “fascist regime.” But the single proved difficult to get out: The pressing plant held up production; platemakers refused to make the liner notes plates; radio 
and TV stations rejected ads; retail outlets refused to place orders; and the single was banned 
from the airwaves. Needless to say, all of this provided incredible publicity. The record was finally released in late May (still a few weeks before the planned celebrations) and was selected as the Single of the Week by all four British music weeklies. By the end of Jubilee Week, it had sold 200,000 copies. But for some official tampering—resulting in a blacked-out song title and group name being listed in the number one slot for the week of June 18, 1977—it would have topped the British charts. The song thrust the Sex Pistols’ rhetoric up against real-world poli-tics. Verbal attacks became physical, and the group, which had not yet recorded an album, could only tour in secret. The Sex Pistols had definitely made rock ‘n’ roll “dangerous” again, and the 
movement they helped to set in motion had barely hit its stride.
Flirtation with Fascism: The Underbelly of Punk
If 1960s rock had been marked by its associations with the political left, punk gravitated equally 
toward symbols at the other end of the political spectrum. In particular, the swastika became a prominent symbol in the punk movement. Its use appeared more as an exercise in confronta-
tional art rather than a political endorsement of fascism. British social theorist Dick Hebdige 
said of the ubiquity of the swastika in British punk that it “was worn because it was guaranteed to shock….its primary value and appeal derived precisely from its lack of meaning: from its potential for deceit.”
23 However, it was unclear that the historical associations surrounding the 
symbol could be so readily overlooked.
r
on Asheton of the Stooges pioneered the use of swastikas and other Nazi iconography, 
soon mirrored by other groups. The Cleveland scene in 1974 hosted Special Extermination Night, which featured 
r
ocket from the Tombs, the Mirrors, and the Eels. Swastikas adorned 
the poster advertising the event. The Eels, whose members wore ripped T-shirts with white-power logos and swastikas, were easily the most offensive group. Pere Ubu released a 1976 single called “Final Solution” (the name of Hitler’s plan to exterminate the Jews). The Dead Boys showed up at CBGB’s 1976 Festival of Unsigned Bands wearing Nazi uniforms.
The Dictators, from New York, shared producers Sandy Pearlman and Murray Krugman 
with offbeat metal band Blue Öyster Cult. Like the Cult, the Dictators flirted with symbols of fascism on songs like “Master 
r
ace 
r
ock,” from their 1975 debut, Go Girl Crazy! (an album that 
predated releases by the 
r
amones and Patti Smith by a year). That most of the band’s members 
were Jews made such references ironic, but the irony could be easily lost on uninformed listeners. 
Similarly, 
r
amones song titles, such as “Blitzkrieg Bop” and “Today Your Love, Tomorrow the 
World,” contained explicit references to Nazism vocalized by the band’s Jewish singer, Joey 
r
amone.
Per their Situationist leanings, Malcolm McLaren and  
Vivienne Westwood had already noted that swastikas could be harnessed to effectively disrupt the flow of everyday life. When the New York Dolls had toured Europe in 1973, with McLaren in Per their Situationist leanings, Malcolm 
McLaren and Vivienne Westwood had 
already noted that swastikas could be 
harnessed to effectively disrupt the flow 
of everyday life.
264  ro CKIN ’ o UTtow, they had added the occasional swastika to their trash drag queen attire. Sid Vicious wore 
T-shirts with swastikas, while Siouxsie Sioux wore a swastika armband. In 1977, the Pistols started performing a song called “Belsen Was a Gas,” written by Vicious—a tasteless state-
ment that lacked the cutting sarcasm and horror of the band’s earlier “Holiday in the Sun,” 
which imagined Nazi concentration camps turned into tourist attractions. For the Pistols in particular, the swastika was only one amidst a complex array of signs mobilized by the band. When they first performed the song that would become “ Anarchy in the U.K.,” McLaren and Westwood designed the “ Anarchy” shirt to complement it—an ideological mishmash that com-bined small portraits of Karl Marx and flying swastikas with slogans like “
o
nly Anarchists Are 
Pretty,” set off by an armband reading “Chaos.” Here politics was turned into the play of signi-fiers, the excess of contradictory meanings designed to call all points of view into question.
As 
r
obert Christgau has pointed out, in a statement widely applicable beyond the 
r
amones:
Unless you think the Ramones identify with Charlie Manson, the Texas chain-saw killer, CIA 
men, SLAers, geeks, glue-sniffers, and electroshock patients—an absurd misreading as far as I’m concerned—then you must conclude that their intention is satiric, and the same applies when they turn to fascist characters.
24
“The problem,” Christgau noted, “is that irony is wasted on pinheads.”25 Lester Bangs 
made a cogent argument against the use of the outrageous: “ Another reason for getting rid of 
all those little barbs is that no matter how you intend them, you can’t say them without risking 
misinterpretation by some other bigoted asshole; your irony just might be his cup of hate.”26 
Bangs recounted the story of Miriam Linna (of the Cramps), quoted in the punk fanzine New 
Order: “I love the 
r
amones [because] this is the celebration of everything American—every-
thing teenaged and wonderful and white.”27 Pictured in leather and shades, she was brandish -
ing a pistol in front of the Florida headquarters of the United White People’s Party. Nico, too, was unmistakably clear when, after performing “Deutschland Uber Alles” at CBGB, she told an 
interviewer that she “didn’t like negroes.”
28 In such a context, the intended irony of Patti 
Smith’s “
r
ock & 
r
oll Nigger” might well have been lost on many punk fans.
The political climate of the 1970s further confused any punk attempts at irony. In the 
United States, the curious concept of reverse discrimination had arisen. The logic of the Civil 
r
ights Act of 1964 was turned on its head when the Supreme Court ruled in 1978 that Alan 
Bakke’s civil rights as a white person had been violated by the University of California’s af-
firmative action policy. The landmark decision signaled the growing strength of a concerted attack on affirmative action and a tremendous resurgence of white supremacist organizations. In this climate, any punk attempts to deconstruct racially loaded terms and symbols might have unintended consequences. Not even the Clash were above misinterpretation. “White 
r
iot” 
had been intended as a statement that the white working class should stand up for its rights as blacks had done at Notting Hill. In the atmosphere of 
racially charged conservatism, however, it was sometimes taken as a racist rallying call for whites to oppose black insurrection.
With the rise of the National Front in Britain, it did not take much 
to fan the flames of racial hatred. But the most inflammatory statements by With the rise of the National Front in 
Britain, it did not take much to fan the 
flames of racial hatred. But the most 
inflammatory statements by musicians 
came not from the punks but from the ranks of the British rock aristocracy.
 P UNK  AND  D ISC o  265musicians came not from the punks but from the ranks of the British rock aristocracy. In 1976, 
David Bowie was quoted as saying, “I think I might have been a bloody good Hitler.”29 He then 
staged his return from Berlin to London with what appeared to be a Nazi salute. While Bowie later apologized, Eric Clapton did not. Clapton interrupted a concert in Birmingham, England, 
in August 1976 with a drunken speech urging support for Enoch Powell, then the most rabid 
antiblack member of Parliament. In response, a letter of protest signed “
r
ock Against 
r
acism” 
was fired off to all the popular music weeklies, precipitating well over 100 enthusiastic replies in the first week alone.
Rock Against Racism: Progressive Punk
rock Against r acism ( r A r ) was a broadly based mass movement in the United Kingdom, 
and its sole purpose was opposition to the National Front. According to 
r
A
r
 historian David 
 
Widgery, the organization had a multilevel strategy:
On one level Rock Against Racism was an orthodox anti-racist campaign simply using pop music 
to kick political slogans into the vernacular. But on another level, it was a jail break. We aimed to rescue the energy of Russian revolutionary art, surrealism and rock and roll from the galleries, 
the advertising agencies and the record companies and use them again to change reality, as had always been intended. And have a party in the process.
30
rAr ’s energy and creativity came from graphic and fashion designers, photographers, 
 
actors, and punk and reggae musicians. Political direction was supplied primarily by the 
 
Socialist 
Workers Party, which later formed the Anti-Nazi League, which then merged with 
r
A
r
.
In late 1976, around the time “ Anarchy in the U.K.” came out, 
r
A
r
 began staging concerts. 
By the following year, it was attracting hundreds of thousands of fans to major events. 
r
A
r
’s 
antiracist strategy of showcasing multicultural Britain in a positive light required packaging 
black and white acts together. In doing so, a tilt toward reggae predominated. As Jon Savage has explained, “ Any fascist ambiguity in Punk was fueled by the way that the style had bled 
r
ock dry 
of all black influences; one way to overcome any taint of white supremacy was to affirm visible links with 
r
eggae.”31 Thus, major r A r  events paired reggae groups with punk bands: Aswad 
with the Adverts, the Cimarrons with Generation X, Steel Pulse with the Clash. 
r
eggae was 
prevalent, of course, in Britain’s West Indian enclaves, but it had also been popular since the late 
1960s with disaffected British white youths attracted to its hypnotic rhythms and unflinching 
“rude boy” stance. Its trajectory among white youth, however, had not always been progressive.
In the late 1960s, skinheads adopted reggae as the martial music to accompany racist at-
tacks. By the mid-1970s, they had become adherents of punk. Some were racist Nazi sympathiz-ers; others liked the music and opposed its fascist leanings. Part of 
r
A
r
’s mission was to claim 
punk—and reggae—for the left, driving a wedge between racist skinheads and those with more progressive tendencies. Sham 69 was a sizzling punk band that had performed for 
r
A
r
, but it 
had a sizable skinhead following who chanted “Sieg Heil” at their concerts and plastered Nazi 
emblems everywhere. 
r
ock Against 
r
acism was able to turn the tables by pairing Sham with 
a Southall reggae outfit called Misty, forcing skinheads to attend a biracial benefit to see their 
favorite group. This punk/reggae convergence contributed significantly to the powerful feeling 266  ro CKIN ’ o UTof racial unity at many r A r  events. At one show in 1977, one member of Generation X and one 
of the Cimarrons joined hands aloft while the entire audience chanted “Black and white. Black 
and white.” Billy Idol remembered the experience as “one of the greatest nights of my life.”32 
The Cimarrons responded by recording a single called “
r
ock Against 
r
acism.”
Bob Marley’s influence was key to the widespread appeal of reggae. Following in his 
wake, Jamaican reggae artists—from the polemical Burning Spear and the anthemic Peter 
Tosh to the more pop-oriented Jimmy Cliff and Third World—contributed to a virtual subin-dustry of reggae influences that affected black Britons and white punks. In the United States, where conditions favored the influence of rhythm and blues, reggae never had a profound im -
pact in the pop market. Prior to the release of the 1973 cult classic reggae film The Harder They Come (starring Jimmy Cliff) and its soundtrack album, the only Jamaican releases to crack the U.S. market had been Millie Small’s “My Boy Lollipop” (1964), produced by Chris Blackwell, and Desmond Dekker’s “The Israelites” (1969). Johnny Nash, a middle-of-the-road r&b singer from Austin, Texas, hit number one on the U.S. charts with his reggae-inflected “I Can See 
Clearly Now” (1972), and his cover of Marley’s “Stir It Up” went to number twelve in 1973. When white U.S. artists gravitated toward reggae, it was usually for a touch of exotica, as in Paul Simon’s “Mother and Child 
r
eunion” (1971). In 1980, Blondie embraced the style on “The 
Tide Is High,” which became a number one hit.
Throughout the 1970s, white British artists were often more successful with reggae 
than were its Jamaican originators. Especially discouraging was the fact that Eric Clapton’s 
 
number one cover of Marley’s “I Shot the Sheriff ” (1974) outsold the Wailers’ original not only in 
 
England and the United States, but also in Jamaica. Clapton never repaid this debt by 
 
supporting 
r
A
r
. Marley, on the other hand, released “Punky 
r
eggae Party” in solidarity with 
r
A
r
’s reggae/punk alliance.
As the 
r
A
r
 push to unite black and white met the reggae explosion, a number of inte-
grated bands were formed that delved into ska, the lighter, faster form of Jamaican dance music preceding reggae. From Coventry came Selecter and the Specials; from London, Madness; and from Birmingham, the English Beat. The groups recorded for a label called 2-Tone, a bow to the interracial character of the bands and their music. UB40, another ska-influenced band, came shortly thereafter, taking its name from the British unemployment form.
In attempting to build as broad a base as possible, 
r
A
r
 also reached across lines of sexual 
orientation and gender. Gay activist Tom 
r
obinson unfurled the first “
r
ock Against 
 
Sexism” 
banner while performing at an 
r
A
r
 concert. At 
r
A
r
 concerts, he 
moved even straight audiences to tears with his heart-wrenching performances of “Glad to Be Gay.” 
r
A
r
’s endorsement of progres-
sive sexual politics dovetailed nicely with a potential that had been 
 
inherent in punk from the beginning: the creation of new cultural spaces for women. In New York, women appeared in groups like DNA and Mars wearing black jeans, boots, T-shirts, and leather jackets—the same 
 
defiant image used by the men—and projecting an angry, 
dissonant and “unfeminine” sound. The sound was christened “no wave” in opposition to new wave. “It was liberating,” exclaimed Adele Bertei, organist for the Contortions, “we were just like the boys, finally, we could do what the fuck we wanted to, without any sexist bullshit.”
33 The Rock Against Racism movement 
provided a context that nurtured the 
more progressive impulses in punk. In 
return, punk and reggae musicians sup-
plied the left with the cultural politics needed to reach youth. It was one of the most successful marriages of music and 
politics ever to occur.
 P UNK  AND  D ISC o  267Los Angeles gave rise to the likes of poet Exene Cervenka, who led the group X with her hus-
band, John Doe; and Alice Bag, the Chicana front woman of the Bag Band.
In London, there was Siouxsie Sioux and the Banshees and the Slits, an all-female band 
that was as dedicated as any to the merging of British punk with Jamaican reggae. X-
r
ay Spex’s 
Poly Styrene—a biracial woman with braces and an acid wit—turned the group’s first record, 
“
o
h Bondage! Up Yours!” into a tirade against the notion that “little girls should be seen but 
not heard.” In 1978, the band joined the Clash, Steel Pulse, the Tom 
r
obinson Band, and others 
as headliners of 
r
A
r
’s biggest event at Victoria Park. By then, even Siouxsie and the Banshees 
had publicly distanced themselves from fascist icons. 
r
A
r
 had had its intended effect.
In the British general election of 1979, the National Front was soundly defeated. To be 
sure, Margaret Thatcher’s exploitation of white Britain’s racial fears played a major role in rallying the conservative vote for the Tories, but the effect of 
r
A
r
 cannot be discounted. The 
r
ock Against 
r
acism movement provided a context that nurtured the more progressive im-
pulses in punk. In return, punk and reggae musicians supplied the left with the cultural politics 
needed to reach youth. It was one of the most successful marriages of music and politics ever to occur.
Riding the New Wave
For the most part, the r A r  movement coincided with the heyday of punk’s first generation 
of performers. By the second generation, punk had been born again as new wave. The term 
“new wave” emerged in England at roughly the same time as “punk,” and for a time they were 
used interchangeably. After “new wave” became more commonly applied in the U.S., however, 
it came to connote a more accessible—and so more commercially acceptable—channeling of punk tendencies.
34 In the United States, Blondie and the Talking Heads easily assumed the new 
wave label. The Clash made the transition while touring the United States so extensively they 
lost contact with their home base. In Britain, the label was applied to Elvis Costello, the Police, 
and the Pretenders, who indicated some of the ways in which punk was being reinterpreted in 
the years following its emergence.
If any single performer bridged the gap between punk and new wave and embodied all the 
contradictions contained therein, it was Declan Patrick McManus, a.k.a. Elvis Costello. When Costello started recording for Stiff, he was married, had a son, and had not given up his day jobs. Leaving the label in late 1977, his debut album, My Aim Is True, was issued on Columbia, as were all of his subsequent U.S. releases. Costello combined the words of a poet with the temper of a madman. He told the press “revenge and guilt” were his primary motivations for his songs.
Costello had genuinely catholic tastes in popular music, showing his attraction to 
 
American 
r&b on Get Happy!! (1980) and to country music on Almost Blue (1981). 
o
nly Joe 
 
Jackson—who 
moved from reggae to swing to salsa, jazz, and funk on a series of albums including Night & Day  
(1982)—rivaled his eclecticism. Costello generated hit after hit in Britain but managed only one 
U.S. Top Forty single, “Every Day I Write the Book” (1983). His albums, however, usually gar-nered respectable chart positions, unlike most of the British new wave pack.
No less contradictory than the punks who had preceded him, Costello was a staunch sup-
porter of 
r
A
r
. Inspired by 
r
A
r
’s punk/reggae fusion, his first big hit in Britain, “Watching HEAR MORE
Elvis Costello on 
MySearchLab268  ro CKIN ’ o UTthe Detectives” (1977), was a lively reggae track backed by the r umour. He contributed a num-
ber of antifascist songs to the 
r
A
r
 movement—“Less Than Zero” from My Aim Is True (1978), 
“Goon Squad” from Armed Forces (1979), among others—and shared the stage with Aswad 
at 
r
A
r
’s Brixton Carnival Two in 1978. None of this, however, kept him from getting into 
trouble in the United States the following year when Bonnie Bramlett belted him for mutter-
ing racial slurs about 
r
ay Charles. Although his anger often got the best of him, he remained 
a darling of the critics throughout his career. At the end of the 1980s, he was still charting decently in the lower reaches of the U.S. Top Forty.
Like Costello, the Police—Sting (bass and vocals), Andy Summers (guitar), and 
 
Stewart 
Copeland (drums)—rose from the British punk scene; but unlike Costello, the group was re-garded as suspiciously commercial because they appeared in TV ads. Managed by Copeland’s brother Miles, the Police were thrown into the new wave category primarily because of their 
nod toward reggae, which can be heard in early hits such as “Can’t Stand Losing You” and “
r
oxanne.” Reggatta de Blanc (1979), the title of the group’s second album, is patois for 
“white reggae.” More successfully than almost all who preceded them, they turned their 
 
adaptation of reggae style into the basis for a widely accessible and popular sound, drawing attention for their disciplined musicianship, strong songwriting, and Sting’s rugged good looks. “Message in a Bottle” and “Walking on the Moon” from Reggatta de Blanc, and “Every Little Thing She Does Is Magic” and “Spirits in the Material World” from Ghosts in the 
 
Machine (1981), rank among the more engaging songs of the era. Synchronicity (1983), their 
last album, included their biggest hit, “Every Breath You Take,” and remained in the number one slot for seventeen weeks; it also turned them into one of the biggest rock acts in the world. Sting enjoyed the greatest solo success in subsequent years, and also became active in 
Amnesty International. When the Police reunited to tour in 2007–2008, they staged the 
highest grossing tour of 2007 and one of the ten highest grossing concert tours of all time by the following summer.
If the Police used the new cultural possibilities offered by the 
punk/reggae fusion to become successful, Chrissie Hynde walked through the door that punk had opened for women. Born in 
 
Akron, 
o
hio, Hynde attended Kent State for three years without being aware 
of the punk scene developing in her own backyard. In 1973, she moved to London, where she wrote for New Musical Express, clerked for McLaren and Westwood, and eventually formed the Pretenders. 
Starting with a cover of the Kinks’ “Stop Your Sobbing,” the band’s 1980 eponymous debut album charted respectably in the U.S., with material ranging from aggressive, no-holds-barred rock (“Tattooed Love Boys,” “Precious”) to reggae (“Private Life”) and ballads (the hit “Brass in Pocket”). “Back on the Chain Gang” (1982), the band’s biggest single, came after the death of founding guitarist James Honeyman-Scott; bassist Pete Farndon would die soon after its release, leaving Hynde to reform the band with new members and move forward. Despite her clear strength and independence, like many female rockers Hynde did not embrace feminism; she later said, “It’s not sexist to say that a woman’s place is in the home looking after chil-dren.”
35 Nonetheless, Hynde projected a toughness as leader of the Pretenders that set an im-
portant model for other women who chose to pursue rock as a career.If the Police used the new cultural 
 
possibilities offered by the punk/reggae 
fusion to become successful, Chrissie 
Hynde walked through the door that 
punk had opened for women.
 P UNK  AND  D ISC o  269As new wave journeyed toward mainstream success, a counter-movement arose that 
sought to retain the edge and anticommercialism of early punk. Hardcore emerged in two prin-
cipal locations: Southern California, where it was foreshadowed by the Germs and Fear and re-
alized by Black Flag, the Circle Jerks, and the Minutemen; and Washington, D.C., where it was 
pioneered by the groundbreaking African American ensemble Bad Brains (who soon relocated to New York) and Minor Threat. These bands and others like Vancouver, Canada’s D
o
A and Min-
neapolis, Minnesota’s Hüsker Dü, would increase punk tempos to the limits of human endurance while they railed against the conditions of everyday life. Accompanying the aggressive sound was a new dance style called slamming, which first emerged at the Fleetwood club in 
 
California’s 
r
edondo Beach. To the uninitiated, slamming could easily be mistaken for fighting, but for those 
inside the scene it formed the basis for an intensified sense of subcultural belonging.
Key to the development of hard core was SST, an independent label started by Black Flag 
guitarist Greg Ginn in 1978. Ginn became an icon of the hardcore value of “doing it yourself ” 
or DIY . Along with running SST, Ginn also led Black Flag along some of the earliest punk rock tours across the U.S., traveling by van and sleeping on apartment floors to keep costs down. The band came into its own when Washington, D.C., transplant Henry 
r
ollins joined as 
singer. 
o
n Black Flag’s full-length debut LP , Damaged, 
r
ollins seemed to delight in celebrat-
ing depression and inflicting pain (mostly on himself), while Ginn’s dissonant guitar style set a new standard for punk anti-virtuosity. When the band slowed its sound for their next release, My War (1983), many hardcore fans accused them of “going metal” and selling out, but Black Flag remained a distinctly underground proposition until the band’s 1986 dissolution.
36While the Police had little sympathy in the punk community, they achieved more commercial 
success than most groups in the punk/new wave category. After they peaked, they tended to go their separate ways, with Sting remaining in the limelight as a solo artist.
270  ro CKIN ’ o UTSST was also the musical home of the Minutemen and Hüsker Dü. Given the brevity of 
their music, the Minutemen were aptly named. “
o
n their first few recordings,” 
r
obert Palmer 
noted, “the Minutemen got through every song in under two minutes, many in under one, and 
still had time to sing each song through once, insert a manic guitar break and sing the song 
again.”37 The band’s sparse, jagged style departed from what was already becoming a standard 
hardcore sound, however, and by Double Nickels on the Dime (1984) the Minutemen emerged as 
one of the most musically experimental and politically engaged American punk bands. Hüsker 
Dü underwent a similar evolution. Land Speed Record (1982) was characteristic hardcore—
loud, hard, and fast. 
o
nly two years later, the double-album Zen Arcade (1984) showed the band 
expanding into more melodic terrain that at times called to mind the Who, without losing their 
hardcore-like intensity.
The Washington, D.C., variant of hardcore was first refined by Bad Brains, a black en-
semble that paralleled the Clash in its combination of punk and reggae styles. Forming under the influence of Bad Brains, Minor Threat exerted an influence on the local scene comparable to that of Black Flag on the West Coast. Singer Ian MacKaye co-founded the pivotal record label Dischord with band mate Jeff Nelson, and pursued a rigid DIY ethos in opposition to the 
mainstream music industry. Minor Threat also gave rise to the straight edge movement with its song of the same name, rejecting the typical union of “sex, drugs, and rock ‘n’ roll” and promoting a life of abstinence and purity—although MacKaye himself would insist that the song was not meant to become the basis for a lifestyle choice.
38 After Minor Threat disbanded 
in 1983, MacKaye went on to form Fugazi, which took hardcore in a more expressly political 
direction, railing against racism, sexism, and environmental destruction.After Henry Rollins joined Black Flag as lead singer in 1981, with his intense vocals and boundless 
energy, the band, which had already set the bar for L.A. hardcore, really hit its stride.
 P UNK  AND  D ISC o  271The most politically oriented band in the hardcore scene was the San Francisco-based 
Dead Kennedys, formed in 1978 and fronted by Jello Biafra, a dedicated left-wing activist. 
o
n 
their first album, Fresh Fruit for Rotting Vegetables (1980), Biafra’s biting satire was applied to 
issues ranging from poverty (“Kill the Poor”) to U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia (“Holiday 
in Cambodia”) to the “zen fascist” devotees of the California lifestyle (“California Über Alles”). The follow-up, In God We Trust, Inc. (1981), was issued on the band’s own Alternative 
 
Tentacles 
label, and featured the snarling anti-racist screed, “Nazi Punks Fuck 
o
ff.”
While hard-core was pushing punk to the limit, new wave 
was incorporating other influences that pointed the music back to its roots. Early punk had strayed as far from black influences as one could get; the connection was rebuilt primarily through reg-gae in Britain and rhythm and blues in the United States. The 
Talking Heads expanded from early r&b forays to use African drummers on Fear of Music (1979). Their unique synthesis of black and white reached its zenith on Remain in Light (1980), which featured Nona Hendryx (formerly of LaBelle) guesting on vocals and Bernard Worrell (formerly of Parliament) on keyboards. Some new wavers even began to make alliances with the dance craze that was threatening to swallow the music industry whole—disco. Blondie’s breakthrough single in the United States, “Heart of Glass” (1979), began as a parody of disco, but pop producer Mike Chapman made it a genuine dance-floor hit and a number one single. That same year, Third World released a full-fledged disco hit called “Now That We Found Love.” 
o
ne year later, Devo scored their only U.S. hit single with 
“Whip It,” another dance-floor favorite. Disco was what was happening and, at the beginning 
at least, the site of enormous creativity. “I’m cynical about rock music,” said canny new waver 
David Byrne. “The innovations in popular music seem to be more often in disco and funk in the last ten years.”
39
Disco: The Rhythm without the Blues
“ After 1970, when psychedelia gave way to a vogue for downers,” Stephen Holden has written, 
“public dancing hit a low point. About the only people who didn’t stop dancing were blacks and gays.”
40 Add Latinos to Holden’s list as well. The clubs frequented by the dancers were called 
discos, from the French word discothèque —or record library. Discos had been around in the 
United States since the early 1960s. Some of these clubs, like New York’s Peppermint Lounge, 
referred to by Rolling Stone as “rock & roll discos,”41 booked live acts like Joey Dee and the 
Starlighters. By the early 1970s, most discos featured DJs and light shows; and the dancers had 
added their own pharmacological embellishments. Unlike the hallucinogens favored by 1960s 
rockers, the downers preferred by heavy metal fans, or the speed that fueled punk, disco drugs 
of choice were cocaine and poppers (amyl and butyl nitrate). “It was about communal dance ecstasy,” Tom Smucker has written. “ A new brew of 1970s self-absorption and 1960s collectiv -
ity, mixing aerobics, the pick-up singles bar, drug highs and light shows…made the dance floor, rather than the concert hall, the locus of orgasmic revelation.”
42While hard-core was pushing punk to 
the limit, new wave was incorporating 
other influences that pointed the music 
back to its roots. Early punk had strayed 
as far from black influences as one could get; the connection was rebuilt primarily through reggae in Britain and 
rhythm and blues in the United States.
272  ro CKIN ’ o UTLong before it became a genre unto itself, disco was whatever was played in dance clubs. 
“ At the start, it was an amalgam of pirated songs,” Barbara Graustark reported in Newsweek  
in 1979. “In black, Latino and gay all-night clubs on Fire Island, in New York City, and San 
Francisco, club deejays would create non-stop sequences of dance music by weaving together 
twenty minute medleys of tunes by Diana 
r
oss, Barry White, The Temptations and Marvin 
Gaye.”43 Isaac Hayes and MFSB were also early favorites. As the sound began to evolve, its 
inspiration came from far and wide: “From Latin music, it takes its percolating percussion, 
its sensuous, throbbing rhythms; from the ‘60s ‘funk’ music of James Brown and Sly Stone, 
it borrows a kicky bass-guitar line; from Afro-Cuban music, it repeats simple lyric lines like 
voodoo chants; and like early rock ‘n’ roll, it exploits the honking saxophones of black rhythm and blues,” Graustark noted.
44 often, nuances of musical taste indicated sexual preference. In 
the words of club deejay Danae: “Straight disco is heavy-duty funk….Gays like to hear black 
women singers; they identify with the pain, the irony, the self-consciousness. We pick up on the 
emotional content, not just the physical power.”45
Latin music was primarily an outside influence. Salsa was just coming into its own, a 
separate subindustry with its own record labels (notably, Fania), distribution networks, and 
performance venues. Although Fania All Stars compilations like Spanish Fever and Crossover  
contained disco material, and Fania often supplied disco deejays with records, there was little 
direct crossover to pop. Aside from Disco Tex and His Sex-
o
-Lettes (“Get Dancin’,” 1974) and 
Foxy (“Get 
o
ff,” 1978), both of which hit the Top Ten, disco produced few Latino stars, prob-
ably because of the difficulties—well documented in 
r
ubén Blades’s poignant film Crossover 
Dreams—of interacting with the mainstream culture.
Proto-Disco: The Funk Connection
Funk’s impact on disco was direct but limited. By the early 1970s, soul, like the rest of popular 
music, had splintered. In the center, Stevie Wonder had a firm hold on the pop soul audience, just as the Jackson 5 appealed to their younger brothers and sisters. At one end of the soul 
spectrum was the lavish, sweet sound of Philadelphia. At the other end was funk, the more 
caustic, percussive sound, descended from James Brown, whose choppy, jagged rhythms inter-rupted the smooth forward motion of its Philadelphia cousin.
Early on, it seemed as if self-contained funk bands such as Kool and the Gang, the 
o
hio 
Players, and Earth, Wind & Fire would make a major contribution to disco. Even a white funk 
band from Scotland, Average White Band (“Pick Up the Pieces”), and a mixed unit from 
o
akland, California, Tower of Power (“What Is Hip”), 
appeared to be cutting a good bit of funk mustard. However, as the dance-floor mania became a more and more upscale trend, the cruder 
sensuality of post-Sly, James Brown–inspired funk was eclipsed by the more polished sound associated with Philadelphia and the controlled, high-tech energy and propulsive (some would say relentless) 4/4 beat of what came to be known as Eurodisco. In many ways, dance music was at its most creative when it combined elements of all these styles: the sweet soul tenor vocal over Earth, Wind & Fire’s funky instrumental SEE MORE
Disco documentary 
on MySearchLab
As the dance-floor mania became 
a more and more upscale trend, the 
cruder sensuality of post-Sly, James 
Brown–inspired funk was eclipsed by 
the more polished sound associated with Philadelphia and the controlled, high-tech energy and propulsive (some 
would say relentless) 4/4 beat of what 
came to be known as Eurodisco.
 P UNK  AND  D ISC o  273on “Shining Star” or Donna Summer’s soulful delivery over producer Georgio Moroder’s clean, 
clear, driving synthesizer tracks on “Hot Stuff,” which won a rock Grammy at the height of disco.
The funk sound had developed over a long period and was absorbed all too soon. Like 
a number of their Philadelphia soul mates, the 
o
hio Players had formed in the 1950s and la-
bored for years before hitting the Top Forty in 1973 with “Funky Worm.” Although they re-
corded five gold albums and a handful of hit singles—“Skin Tight,” a dance-floor favorite, and “Fire” and “Love 
r
ollercoaster,” which hit number one—they disappeared from the Top Forty 
in 1976, even before disco peaked. Kool and the Gang formed in the mid-1960s and first hit the Top Forty in 1973 with “Funky Stuff.” After two follow-up Top Ten singles (“Jungle Boogie” and “Hollywood Swinging”), they had no more big hits until the inclusion of “
o
pen Sesame” on 
the 1978 Saturday Night Fever soundtrack gave them a new lease on life. They came back with three Top Ten singles in a row—“Ladies Night,” “Too Hot,” and the classic “Celebration”—
that took them successfully into the 1980s.
Founded in 1969 by Maurice White, Earth, Wind & Fire did not have a stable lineup 
until Philip Bailey was added as co-lead vocalist in 1973. Throughout the disco era, the group turned out nothing but platinum-selling Top Ten albums. A session drummer at Chess 
 r
ecords, 
White had absorbed a catalogue of styles from American jazz and soul to African folk drum-ming. That’s the Way of the World (1975), the group’s first number one album, contained all the 
musical elements that would wrestle for prominence in disco—funk guitar and horn licks punc-tuating African American and Latin rhythms, topped by lavish strings and sweet harmonies with a James Brown tightness that could be rivaled only by the studio precision of Eurodisco. That’s the Way of the World included the group’s only number one single, “Shining Star.” Under White’s leadership, Earth, Wind & Fire transformed their spiritual interests in Egyptology 
into a media-savvy image. The group was also one of the first African American acts to tour 
with theater sets and special effects. Even at their most grandiose, however, Earth, Wind & Fire seemed to be well within the bounds of soul orthodoxy when compared with George Clinton.
Earth, Wind & Fire’s sweet soul vocals over their funky instrumental base propelled the group 
through the disco era with nothing but gold and platinum albums to their credit.
274  ro CKIN ’ o UTGeorge Clinton was to funk what glam was to rock. His first group, the Parliaments 
(formed in 1955), had the straight soul hit “(I Wanna) Testify” in 1967 on Berry Gordy’s 
r
evi-
lot label. Following a contract dispute, Clinton found his way to psychedelic drugs, the music 
of Jimi Hendrix, and the burgeoning heavy rock scene in his adopted home of Detroit. So 
transformed, the new George Clinton (a.k.a. Dr. Funkenstein, Maggot 
o
verlord, Uncle Jam) 
was the missing link between the 1960s’ focus on mind expansion and the 1970s’ preoccupation with the body. As funk historian 
r
ickey Vincent wrote, “Clinton and his merry band of crazies 
staked out new conceptual territory and asserted a postmodern black aesthetic at a time when sociologists, politicians, and writers were mired in integrationist dialectics.”
46
Clinton presided over the extensive and hopelessly complicated Parliament/Funkadelic 
empire. For these overlapping and interconnected groups, he used a core of side musicians—
 
Eddie Hazel, Gary Shider, and Mike Hampton on guitar, Bernard Worrell (later with the 
 
Talking Heads) and Junie Morrison on keyboard, James Brown alumni Bootsy Collins on bass, and Fred Wesley and Maceo Parker on horns. Funkadelic recorded Clinton’s hybrid psyche -
delicized funk excursions for Warner. Infused with Hendrix-inspired guitar solos and riffs that at times evoked heavy metal, Funkadelic put forth a potent form of black funk-rock at a time when rock had been moving away from its engagement with black styles. Parliament, which recorded for Casablanca, played down the guitars in favor of keyboard-and-horn driven funk. Both groups and other P-Funk spin-offs like Bootsy’s 
r
ubber Band, the Horny Horns, and the 
Brides of Funkenstein, placed primary emphasis on “the 
o
ne”—a rhythmic concept inherited 
from James Brown that accented the first 
beat of each four-beat measure, but also stood as a metaphor for funk’s message of unity.
47
Parliament/Funkadelic had a prodi-
gious output with reasonably impressive 
sales figures. At the height of the disco craze, 
six of Parliament’s albums placed in the Top 
Thirty, as did two of Funkadelic’s. But disco was primarily a singles medium. As album-oriented groups, Parliament/Funkadelic’s music was not readily available to those who lived only for the dance floor. 
 
Parliament/
Funkadelic had only three Top Thirty 
 
singles—“Tear the 
r
oof off the Sucker (Give 
George Clinton is either a black Frank Zappa 
or James Brown on acid, depending on how you look at it. The mission of his P-Funk empire 
was to “rescue dance music from the blahs.”
 P UNK  AND  D ISC o  275Up the Funk),” “Flash Light,” and “ o ne Nation under a Groove.” 
By the late 1970s, their brisk album sales in the pop market rep-
resented an alternative to disco more than one of its formative 
influences.
Up from the Disco Underground
Although precursors to the disco clubs of the 1970s could be found a decade earlier in New York 
and Los Angeles, dance music’s growth in the 1970s reflected significant cultural and 
 
political 
shifts. Especially pivotal was the growth of the gay liberation movement, which 
 
assumed 
 momentum after the June 1969 Stonewall rebellion, in which patrons of the Stonewall Inn—a 
Greenwich Village dance club that drew a gay male clientele—resisted a “routine” raid by the New York police. In the years that followed, dance clubs became central gathering spaces where gay men and, to a somewhat lesser degree, lesbians could exhibit their growing (if still limited) public freedom of expression. Disco historians have pointed to the Loft, a private dance party started in 1970 by DJ David Mancuso in his New York loft apartment, as an important founding moment.Although the parties were by invitation only, Mancuso established a racially and sexu-ally inclusive (but predominantly male) environment in which dancing provided an empowering sense of physical release.
48
The music played by Mancuso and other early disco deejays was mostly by black artists. 
In this sense, early disco was part of the continuing development of black dance music. Among 
the records that made the rare crossover from clubs to radio was “Soul Makossa” (1973), an 
obscure French import by a Cameroonian artist named Manu Dibango. Dibango thus 
 
became 
the first African musician to have an international hit. The next year, “
r
ock the Boat” by 
the Hues Corporation and “
r
ock Your Baby” by George Mc
r
ae both hit number one. B.T. 
 
Express scored in 1975 with “Do It (‘Til You’re Satisfied),” as did Tavares with “It 
o
nly Takes 
a 
 
Minute.” By 1975, when Van McCoy and the Soul City 
o
rchestra established the hustle as 
the most important new dance craze since the twist, disco was showing signs of respectability, 
but the music industry had not yet taken notice.
Gloria Gaynor’s “Never Can Say Good-Bye” (1975)—reportedly one of the first records 
especially mixed for club play—was the first disco hit to chart as disco. She was unable to fol-
low up with another hit until 1979, when her aptly titled “I Will Survive” went to number one. In the interim, Donna Summer became disco’s queen. But even as her “Love to Love You Baby” rose to number two early in 1976, the established recording industry continued to ignore disco. According to Andrew Kopkind of the Village Voice: “The record companies seemed bewildered by what they had, and promo people continued their quirky disregard of the disco category in their portfolios.”
49
Without promotion from the major record companies, disco was rarely heard on the air-
waves. (The one exception was New York’s top black station, WBLS, where deejay Frankie 
Crocker played many of the early disco club hits.) Forced to remain underground, disco contin-
ued to receive its primary exposure in clubs, popularized only by the creative genius of the disco 
deejays like the aforementioned David Mancuso as well as Francis Grasso, Steve D’Acquisto, Nicky Siano, and Larry Levan, who “became taste-making alchemists-engineers with cults that Although the parties were by invitation 
only, Mancuso established a racially and 
sexually inclusive (but predominantly 
male) environment in which dancing 
provided an empowering sense of physi-cal release.
276  ro CKIN ’ o UTfollowed them from club to club.”50 Faced with difficulty trying to procure enough new records 
to keep their playlists fresh, the deejays organized themselves into “record pools,” or central 
distribution points, where new releases could be discussed and new tastes created. As late as 
1979, about fifty functioning pools could be found in major markets 
scattered across the country. This network of record pools and night-clubs became an alternative to the airplay marketing structure of the music business. Deejays were able to break hits from the dance floor capable of selling upward of 100,000 copies in New York City alone with almost no radio play—demonstrating that disco’s following was not just a fleeting underground party culture but a significant record-buying public.
As early as 1976, the year-end pop charts were bursting with 
disco acts whose records were among Billboard’s forty most popular that year. Although major 
labels signed a number of acts, the majors neither wholeheartedly promoted the music nor supplied its key innovations. When disco hit, its creative energy by and large came from inde-pendent producers and upstart independent labels. Consider 
r
ichard Finch and Harry Wayne 
Casey, who made TK 
r
ecords one of the premiere disco labels. Casey was a songwriter in Mi-
ami, Florida, and knew the club scene; Finch, a bassist, worked as an engineer at TK 
r
ecords in 
Hialeah. Together they wrote and produced George Mc
r
ae’s “
r
ock Your Baby” for TK. Finch 
and Casey then formed KC and the Sunshine Band, a black, white, and Latino ten-piece unit that established TK’s position in disco. In 1975, the band released three singles that, like “
r
ock 
Your Baby,” hit number one on both the pop charts and the r&b charts: “Get Down Tonight,” “That’s the Way (I Like It),” and “Shake Your Booty.” The strong r&b feel of these and other 
hits—like “I’m Your Boogie Man”—came to be known as the Miami Sound, and contributed 
significantly to the funk side of disco.
The SalSoul label tried to fill a niche in the disco market that combined salsa and soul. 
Its founders, three Syrian Jewish brothers—Ken, Joe, and Stanley Cayre—with an interest in Latin music, had relocated from Miami to New York. Afro-Filipino Joe Bataan’s 1973 
 
album 
SalSoul gave the Cayres a name for their new label, and the dance floor hit “Latin Strut” pro-vided the funding to capitalize it when Columbia 
r
ecords, sensing crossover possibilities, 
bought the rights to the song for $100,000.51 The Cayres’ concept for SalSoul was to pro-
duce disco that had “an 
r
&B rhythm and Latin percussion with a pretty melody on top.”52 For 
this sound, they turned toward Philadelphia, where they contracted with Vince Montana, an 
Italian American Latin music aficionado, to assemble the SalSoul 
o
rchestra, an ensemble that 
numbered as many as 50 players, including some of the best conductors and arrangers and 
hottest percussionists in the business, not to mention more than a dozen strings. Their first re-lease, “The SalSoul Hustle” (1975), became a number one disco single; “Tangerine,” a cover of a Jimmy Dorsey tune, crossed over to pop. Ultimately, however, the lush string arrangements and pretty melodies sounded too saccharine and SalSoul too often found itself on the novelty side of disco.
Casablanca was an independent label that backed into disco through its association with 
Donna Summer. Summer, a high school dropout from Boston, was in Munich, in the German production of Hair, when she fell into an alliance with Eurodisco producer Georgio Moroder. HEAR MORE
Audio links to 
 
Selected Year-End  
Disco Hits on 
MySearchLabDeejays were able to break hits from 
the dance floor capable of selling up-
ward of 100,000 copies in New York 
City alone with almost no radio play—
demonstrating that disco’s following was not just a fleeting underground party culture but a significant record-
buying public.
 P UNK  AND  D ISC o  277For what would become Summer’s first U.S. hit single, 
Moroder created a symphonic mix of drum machine rhythms and synthesized sounds and then cleared the 
studio so that the singer could repeat the song’s one-line 
lyric over and over in a breathy whisper while simulat-ing the sound of orgasm twenty-two times. To introduce the song to the U.S. audience, Moroder took a three-minute demo of “Love to Love You Baby” to Neil Bogart of Casablanca 
r
ecords. Bogart, known in the previous 
decade as the Bubblegum King, had produced groups like 
o
hio Express and the 1910 Fruitgum Company for 
Buddah. He had recently founded Casablanca, whose roster included the heavy metal group 
Kiss and George Clinton’s Parliament. The addition of Summer would point Casablanca in yet another direction. It was perhaps Bogart’s inclination to take chances that attracted 
 
Moroder 
to his label.
Summer became a mainstay of Casablanca’s financial health. At her peak, she delivered 
three number one albums and eight Top Ten singles in a row. “I Feel Love” (1977), the follow-up to “Love to Love You Baby,” reached number six with a wave of electronic erotic rhythms that critic Peter Shapiro called “the first record to consider what implications the [synthesizer] would have on the human body.”
53 “Last Dance,” from the film Thank God It’s Friday, earned 
Summer the first of four Grammies in 1978. Summer had trouble rising above her sultry disco 
seductress persona, but she had enough talent to seek more. In 1979, she sang with Barbra 
Streisand on “No More Tears (Enough Is Enough).” Her ambition was also evident, if not fully 
realized, in her autobiographical disco mini-opera, Once Upon a Time. Under the pressures of fame and fortune (and a lawsuit against Casablanca), she became a born-again Christian in the early 1980s and turned her back on disco.
Bogart added the Village People to his roster in 1978. Assembled by Jacques Morali, a 
French producer, the Village People converted the gay male roots of disco into a novelty act whose members dressed as a cowboy, an Indian, a construction worker, a soldier, a cop, and a leather freak. Morali’s upbeat, anthemic melodies and the group’s animated, karate-chop de-livery were presented as camp disco to the general public. For those in the know, however, 
the irony of hits such as “Macho Man,” “Y .M.C.A.,” and “In the Navy” was not particularly subtle. With worldwide sales of 10 million albums, the Village People added measurably to 
 
Casablanca’s fortunes. In 1978 alone, the fledgling company grossed $100 million.HEAR MORE
Donna Summer on 
MySearchLabWhile Donna Summer had the talent to rise above her 
disco queen image, the pressures of fame and fortune ultimately caused her to turn her back on disco altogether.
278  ro CKIN ’ o UT
In the slick, sophisticated sound-world of disco, the producer took on a role 
of primary importance. In “Last Dance,” we hear the winning combination 
of Eurodisco producers Giorgio Moroder and Pete Bellotte and the gospel-
tinged vocals of Donna Summer. Summer, born in Boston, was already enjoy-
ing considerable career success in Europe when her sensuous 1976 disco hit “Love to Love You Baby” became a huge hit in the United States. “Last Dance” was part of the soundtrack to the film Thank God It’s Friday (in which 
Summer also played the role of aspiring singer Nicole Sims). The song won 
both a Grammy and the 1978 Academy Award for Best Original Song.
Musical Style Notes
The slow-dance beginning of “Last Dance,” with its shimmery, bell-like synth-percussion effects and tremolo 
strings, gives way after the first verse to the classic sound of disco: synthesized bass and drums, multiple keyboards, 
string-heavy orchestral textures, and a driving rhythm track with a steady, pounding emphasis on each beat. Summer’s 
strong, vibrant voice carries over this thick texture beautifully, demonstrating disco’s gospel and soul roots with her vocal 
improvisations and vocal melismas (multiple notes sung over one syllable).
In the second repetition of the fast-tempo chorus to “Last Dance,” we can also hear an example of a musical 
technique called modulation, which is another term for “changing key.” The “key” of a piece refers to a specific set of 
notes (scale) and chords used to create the melody and harmony of a musical piece. This set of notes, or scale, has a 
particular keynote. If you were to sing the well-known do-re-mi-fa-so-la-ti-do scale, the “do” would be the keynote. In the second chorus to “Last Dance,” the scale, keynote, and harmonies are all shifted up in pitch a half-tone. This technique is common in pop music, where it is used to create a sudden change to a “brighter” sound, which in turn gives the aural illusion of a spike in the energy and brilliance of a piece.
Musical “Road Map”
Timings Commen T s
0:00–0:15 Introduction; instrumental with melismatic vocal (Melisma: many notes sung over one syllable—in 
this case “hooo.”)
Sonic “colors” added with bells and other synthesized percussion.
0:15–1:15 Verse 1—slow ballad version of verse
1:15–1:19 Pause on sustained chord
1:19–1:35 ChorusNew faster dance tempo begins.
1:35–2:05 Verse repeats in new faster dance tempo.
2:05–2:12 Chorus
2:12–2:24 Chorus modulates to a new, higher key. (See Musical Style Notes above.) Chorus ends with long-
held vocal note.
2:24–3:15 This section features the instrumental musical content of the first half of the verse, with vocaliza-tion on syllable hoo sung over instrumental section, with vocal melisma added.Second half of verse with lyrics repeats in the new key.
2:55–3:15 This section features the instrumental musical content of the chorus, with vocal improvisations: “Come on, baby. Dance that dance,” etc.
3:15 Final chord“Last Dance”
Artist: Donna Summer
Music/Lyrics by Paul Jabara
Label: Casablanca (1978), from 
the LP On the Radio  and the 
soundtrack to the film Thank God 
It’s FridayListening Guide 24 P UNK  AND  D ISC o  279Independent producers were as important to disco’s creativity as independent labels 
were to its production. This was especially so in Europe, where producers like Cerrone and 
Alec Costandinos made quasi-symphonic disco concept LPs such as Love in C Minor and Love 
and Kisses, respectively. Eurodisco and its U.S. counterpart had significant differences. While 
Eurodisco albums were often conceived as a conceptual whole, U.S. disco was oriented toward individual songs and was more r&b-based. Freddie Perren in the United States, for example, produced albums that were aggregations of singles, which varied in function, tempo, and mood with no segues between songs. As an independent producer (originally with Motown), his first successes included the Sylvers’ Jackson 5–ish “Boogie Fever” and Tavares’ pop-oriented “Heaven Must Be Missing an Angel” and “Who Dunit.” In the late 1970s, he produced Gaynor’s “I Will Survive” and Peaches and Herb’s disco hit “Shake Your Groove Thing”—but neither of their albums were all disco. In contrast, Georgio Moroder thought of himself as a composer. 
For Donna Summer’s Live and More LP , Moroder wrote “Heaven Knows” to complement the rhythm and feeling of “MacArthur Park,” the song it follows, thereby maintaining the same tempo and emotional edge for the entire album side.
In some ways, Eurodisco album-length compositions at-
tempted to do the work of club deejays. In the United States, where the success of disco depended, at least at first, on deejay creativity, the music developed as a singles medium. In fact, a whole new sub-industry of twelve-inch, 45 rpm singles (the so-called disco mix)—a format pioneered by New York deejay Tom Moulton—opened to ac-commodate the specific needs of club deejays for extended play and heavy bass. This innovation would provide the foundation for rap records in the next decade.
Mainstream Disco: The Bee Gees Boogie Down
In keeping with the popular music tradition of black innovation and white popularization, it 
was not until a white supergroup—the Bee Gees—came to dominate the scene that disco finally took on the mantle of respectability. According to Andrew Kopkind, 1978 saw disco achieve 
genuine “crossover” appeal, with the Bee Gees leading the charge: “[T]hey made disco safe 
for white, straight, male, young, and middle-class America. What Elvis Presley did for black rhythm and blues,…the Brothers Gibb have done for disco.”
54
By the time that Barry, Maurice, and r obin Gibb struck disco gold, they had already been 
through at least three musical incarnations. They began their hit-making career as a Beatles 
sound-alike act with “New York Mining Disaster 1941/Have You Seen My Wife Mr. Jones” in 
1967. After embarking on undistinguished solo careers, their 1970 reunion again produced hits 
(“How Can You Mend a Broken Heart” at number one), but no distinctive voice until Atlantic producer Arif Mardin helped them create their disco-era persona. 
o
n Main Course, he encour-
aged the r&b feel evident on cuts like “Jive Talkin’,” a number one hit in 1975. 
o
n “Nights 
on Broadway,” Barry unveiled the falsetto that would become the group’s disco trademark, perfecting the sound on “You Should Be Dancing,” which rose to number one in 1976. When 
 r
obert Stigwood commissioned them to write the soundtrack for the feature film Saturday 
Night Fever, they captured the disco crown.Eurodisco album-length compositions 
attempted to do the work of club dee-
jays. In the United States, where the 
success of disco depended, at least at 
first, on deejay creativity, the music de-veloped as a singles medium.
280  ro CKIN ’ o UTThe Bee Gees had always been as-
sociated with Stigwood. In 1967, they 
were signed to a five-year management 
contract with Brian Epstein’s NEMS 
company when Stigwood was its direc-tor. 
r
eportedly, Stigwood paid $2,500 for 
a 51 percent interest in their publishing.55 
Beginning with Main Course, all Bee Gees 
recordings had been released on his 
r
S
o
 
label. Stigwood was a master at “cross-
over media,” described by Newsweek’s David Ansen as the process through which “album sells theater ticket, play sells movie rights, soundtrack album sells movie, movie sells soundtrack album.”
56 
Stigwood bought the performance rights to the Jesus Christ Superstar album in 1970; he was also 
involved with the production of the film version of Tommy, the Who’s rock opera, in 1975 and 
with Grease, Evita, and Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band in 1978, months after he produced 
Saturday Night Fever, whose music he already owned.
Stigwood’s crossover media plan was orchestrated to perfection with Saturday Night 
 
Fever. “How Deep Is Your Love,” from the soundtrack album, rose to number one about two 
months before the film’s release. By the time the film broke in 504 theaters, “Stayin’ Alive,” 
which opens the movie, was number one. “Every time the deejay announced ‘Stayin’ Alive’,” crowed 
r
S
o
 
r
ecords president Al Coury, “he said, ‘That’s from the movie Saturday Night Fever 
starring John Travolta.’ It was millions and millions of dollars of free publicity.”57 Two months 
later, “Night Fever,” from which the film took its name, occupied the number one slot, which, of 
course, kept the film in circulation that much longer. This kind of marketing would become the 
rule in the 1980s, a decade dominated by video clips and movie tie-ins.
The success of Saturday Night Fever was unprecedented. The film grossed $130 million 
in its first U.S. run; the soundtrack album sold 15 million copies in the United States and 30 
million worldwide, becoming the best-selling record in history at the time. In addition to the Bee Gees’ three number one hits, the LP generated hits for Tavares (“More Than a Woman”), the Trammps (“Disco Inferno”), and a number one single for Yvonne Elliman (“If I Can’t Have The Brothers Gibb had been through a 
number of incarnations before achieving superstardom as top-selling disco artists. 
Their music crossed the dance fever over 
to the mainstream with a level of satura-tion that almost guaranteed a backlash.
 P UNK  AND  D ISC o  281You”), all within the film’s initial run. The film even showcased the Latin side of disco with  David 
Shire’s “Salsation.” Midway through the year, 
r
S
o
 estimated that its 1978 revenues would be 
somewhere between $300 million and $500 million. The biggest winner of all, however, was 
Polygram, the Netherlands-based conglomerate that distributed both 
r
S
o
 and Casablanca.
Culturally, the combined impact of the film and soundtrack album was harder to measure. 
o
n the one hand, with its focus on the Italian-American hero Tony Manero (played by John 
Travolta in a breakthrough role), Saturday Night Fever made the black and Latino populations 
so central to disco’s mere background, and all but erased the genre’s significant gay constitu-ency. 
o
n the other hand, the film presented a gripping portrait of the constraints of working-
class life, and promoted a socially progressive message best summed up by cultural historian Alice Echols, that “preordained social hierarchies, be they rooted in race or gender, are toxic.”
58
After Saturday Night Fever, it became impossible to ignore disco. Artists of all persua-
sions jumped on the disco bandwagon. Cher’s “Take Me Home” reached number eight; Dolly 
Parton contributed “Baby I’m Burnin’”; jazz flautist Herbie Mann had a disco hit with 
“
 
Superman.” Even the 
r
olling Stones and 
r
od Stewart became disco converts. The Stones’ 
“Miss You” sold 2 million copies, and Stewart scored the best-selling single of his career, “Do 
Ya Think I’m Sexy?” With such guaranteed hit-making artists on board, radio and television soon followed suit.
The commercial potential of disco came into full bloom when WKTU, an obscure soft 
rock station in New York, converted to an all-disco format. Within months, WKTU went from a dreary 0.9 share of the market to an unbelievable 11.3 share, making it the most listened-to station in the country. This was in December 1978. By March 1979, some 200 disco stations 
were broadcasting in major markets, from Miami to Los Angeles, and syndicated television programs such as Disco Magic and Dance Fever had brought the dancing craze to the heartland. That year, disco records captured eight out of fourteen pop Grammy awards. 
o
ver 36 million adults thrilled to the musical mixes of 8,000 pro-
fessional deejays who worked just a portion of the estimated 20,000 disco clubs. According to varying estimates, disco accounted for 20 to 40 percent of Billboard’s chart action. All in all, the disco phenomenon spawned an industry with annual revenues rang-ing between $4 and $8 billion.
The entire disco apparatus now became harnessed to the service of industry profits. 
r
ecord pools served as marketing tools, supplying the record companies with crucial demo-
graphic data. Everything from Glenn Miller’s “Chattanooga Choo-Choo” to the theme from “Star Wars” to Stravinsky’s “Firebird Suite” fell prey to the relentless disco beat; Beethoven’s “Fifth Symphony” was an early victim. Percy Faith even recorded a disco version of “Hava Nagila.” In the hands of the industry, disco seemed to gobble up everything in its wake.
By this time, disco had come to symbolize the mindless overindulgence its critics had 
complained about in the first place. The disco underground, once a haven for the disenfran-chised, had surfaced as affluent-chic. Disco “is the height of effete snobbery,” snapped one observer, “the ultimate in mindless narcissism. Disco is Margaret Trudeau, Truman Capote, Cher, and all their vacuous Studio 54–People magazine cronies.”
59 The exclusivity of Studio HEAR MORE
Saturday Night Fever 
on MySearchLab
The commercial potential of disco 
came into full bloom when WKTU, an 
obscure soft rock station in New York, 
converted to an all-disco format. Within 
months, WKTU went from a dreary 0.9 share of the market to an unbelievable 11.3 share, making it the most listened-
to station in the country.
282  ro CKIN ’ o UT54—the über-fashionable nightclub that opened in 1977—paradoxically gave rise to one of 
the great hits of the disco era, when Nile 
r
odgers and Bernard Edwards of the band Chic took 
their anger at being denied entry and channeled it into a funky groove punctuated by shouts 
of “fuck off.” When “fuck off ” became “freak out,” Chic had the song “Le Freak,” which reached 
number one on the Billboard Hot 100 in December 1978, and became the best-selling single in the history of Atlantic records.
60 other black artists complained that they had to submit to the 
demand for disco. “We’re in a period of the McDonald’s of music, where it’s mass-marketed like 
junk food,” lamented Melba Moore, whose “You Stepped into My Life” was a disco hit. “I don’t 
know what good is any more.”61 In any given week, as many as forty of Billboard’s Hot 100 were 
disco releases. With the market saturated to this degree, a backlash was inevitable, and given 
disco’s particular history, it was bound to have racial overtones.
The Hard Rock Reaction
The most visceral anti-disco reactions came from the hard rock/heavy metal axis of popu-lar music. As John Travolta won the urban white youth market for disco and scores of radio stations across the country converted to a disco format almost overnight, FM rock radio re-
sponded to its loss of audience share by initiating various anti-disco campaigns. Dave Marsh, 
writing in Rolling Stone, explained their motivation:
As competition becomes fiercer, each station must settle for a narrower demographic range. Right 
now the goal is males, ages eighteen to thirty-four…. [They] are the most likely to see disco as the product of homosexuals, blacks, and Latins, and therefore they’re the most likely to respond to appeals to wipe out such threats to their security. It goes almost without saying that such appeals are racist and sexist, but broadcasting has never been an especially civil-libertarian medium.
62
Georgia Christgau had pointed out these tendencies in New York six months earlier:
Three progressive FM rock stations in New York run anti-disco campaigns. It’s not hard to 
do—radio is already segregated black from white. At a sellout show of Twisted Sister, a local 
group with a white following, a banner displayed from the balcony read, “We hate disco because it sucks.” This isn’t opinion, it’s willful ignorance, racism feeding on paranoia….
63
The height of anti-disco mania occurred on July 12, 1979, when Chicago deejay Steve 
Dahl staged a “Disco Demolition Night” for station WLUP (the Loop) at a White Sox double-
header. Drawn by the Loop’s nonstop hype, 47,795 fans (more rock than baseball) paid their 
way into Comiskey Park, while about half that number either gate-crashed or swarmed around 
outside. As soon as Dahl blew up a cache of disco records between games, hordes of rock crazies stormed the field, tearing up turf and chanting “Disco sucks!” at the top of their lungs. When park security was unable to restore order, the Sox were forced to forfeit the second game.
64
In the frenzy of the anti-disco campaigns, hard rock fans generalized their anti-disco feel-
ings to include all black music, while rock radio fanned the flames of racism. As 
r
obert Hilburn 
has written:
Rock-oriented radio stations could have educated this young audience on the historical link be-
tween rock and black music by programming classic Motown-Stax-Hendrix tracks or the  P UNK  AND  D ISC o  283rock-oriented tracks by such contemporary black stars as Stevie Wonder, Prince, Donna Summer, 
and Rick James. Eager to be culturally in tune with their listenership, however, the stations care-lessly picked up on the anti-disco sentiment and fell into racist programming policies: They simply 
stopped playing all black records.
65
Although FM radio’s A or  stations viewed disco as a serious threat to their well-being, 
they were in no real financial danger. A
or
 was programmed on the basis of sophisticated mar-
ket research that targeted the record-buying habits of the population with the most disposable 
income. Needless to say, A
or
’s reliance on such research meant that it often excluded black 
music. WKTU may have been the most listened-to station in 1979, but with an estimated “an -
nual pretax income of about $6 million on revenues of $9 million,” A
or
 station KMET in Los 
Angeles was by far the most lucrative.66 The economic reality for radio was that “disco pulled 
in an audience that was older, younger, more female or less affluent than desired. And it was 
easy to see that stations that had stuck to hard rock—KMET in Los Angeles, for instance—
were prospering in just the demographic areas radio needed. So rock rose.”67
As rock radio reasserted its primacy, black-oriented radio stations were forced to adopt 
a new format—Urban Contemporary. Black radio had often had to attract a white listener-
ship just to maintain respectable ratings; the competitive environment of the 1970s added even 
more pressure to appeal to a more affluent demographic. According to Pablo Guzman: “To 
satisfy everyone in the spirit of the lowest common denominator and to appease big-budget advertisers who were still nervous about the ‘black’ tag, black references were dropped, music that was ‘too funky’ was abandoned in favor of white ‘crossover’ and UC was born.”
68 Sta-
tions retained black artists in the soul, funk, and jazz idioms who were central to their playl-
ists—Stevie Wonder, Donna Summer, 
r
ick James, Third World, Funkadelic, Quincy Jones, and 
George Benson—and added white acts that fit the format—David Bowie or Hall and 
o
ates. As 
the strategy began to show returns, bewildered black listeners wondered why their stations 
were programming more and more white artists. Though assuring listeners of their commitment to the black audience, stations con-tinued to drift toward the mainstream market.
Urban Contemporary was an interesting concept because it 
was designed as a multiracial format. It was also quite successful, surpassing even A
or
 stations in many instances. Still, while 
 
Urban 
Contemporary programmers provided greater access to white mu-
sicians on what had been black-oriented stations, black perform-ers did not gain greater access to rock radio. Urban Contemporary may well have been a net loss for black artists.
By the end of the 1970s, punk—born again as new wave—had assimilated such diverse musi-
cal influences (from Jamaican ska to electronic music to disco itself) that it had expanded beyond categorization. Dance-oriented cuts like Blondie’s “Heart of Glass,” the Clash’s “Magnificent Seven,” and Spandau Ballet’s “Freeze” found their way into disco clubs, further blurring the line between genres. Disco, as a distinct musical style, became so bloated that it began to collapse while Urban Contemporary program-
mers provided greater access to white 
musicians on what had been black-ori-
ented stations, black performers did not 
gain greater access to rock radio. Urban Contemporary may well have been a net loss for black artists.
284  ro CKIN ’ o UTunder its own weight, and black artists began to move in different musical directions. Tradi-
tional soul artists such as Smokey Robinson and Stevie Wonder reappeared on the year-end pop charts. At the same time, a new style of black music known as rap was born. Artists like the Sugar 
Hill Gang, Kurtis Blow, and Grand Master Flash and the Furious Five transformed the street 
poetry of Harlem and the South Bronx into black popular culture. Other black artists—notably Prince—moved in a rock-oriented direction. Indeed, the artist who dominated in the 1980s was Michael Jackson, the best-selling pop star in history. Jackson’s ascent to superstardom was initially hampered by technological advances that allowed the transfer of radio’s restrictive pro-gramming policies to the new medium of music television. As economic imperatives propelled the music industry toward a strategy of globalization, however, the 1980s witnessed a significant reshuffling of the musical deck. Even as the industry moved toward greater concentration,  
African American artists achieved superstar status in unprecedented numbers, and popular  
music became more politically engaged than in any period since the 1960s.
LEARN MORE
Chapter Questions on 
MySearchLab  285
9
The murder of John Lennon on December 8, 1980, put  
the big chill to any vestiges of the 1960s idealism that had survived the 
me decade, just as the election of Ronald Reagan one month earlier made 
it clear that the country was moving in a new political direction. The 
Keynesian economic strategies of pump priming and deficit spending 
that had defined the Democratic Party’s fiscal policy since the 1930s no longer held sway among the electorate. Reagan’s laissez-faire new federalism, which some labeled voodoo eco-nomics, promised that deregulation of big business and tax cuts for the rich would yield a balanced budget and benefits that trickled down to everyone. Instead, the federal govern-ment experienced its worst deficit in history to date, and the 
gap between rich and poor steadily widened.
When Reagan was elected in 1980, the music industry, like society as a whole, was in a 
state of flux. Disco had fallen victim to its own predictability and the racist backlash of hard rock fans. At the same time, punk had evolved into new wave, an umbrella category so diverse that it was nearly meaningless. As a result, the music industry’s marketing categories were temporarily thrown into disarray. For a time, the term new music  was used to describe every-
body from Blondie to Michael Jackson.
In 1979, the U.S. music industry suffered its first major recession in thirty years. Its phenom-
enal growth in the mid-1970s had led many to believe that it was nearly recession-proof. Between 1978 and 1979, however, revenues from the sale of recorded music in the United States declined by 11 percent—to $3.7 billion from an all-time high of $4.1 billion.
1 Over the next few years, LEARN MORE
Learning objectives 
on MySearchLabAre We the World? 
Music Videos, Superstars, and Mega-Events
The murder of John Lennon on  
December 8, 1980, put the big chill  
to any vestiges of the 1960s idealism 
that had survived the me decade, just 
as the election of Ronald Reagan one month earlier made it clear that the country was moving in a new political 
direction.286  RO c KI n’ OUTBy the early 1980s, advances in satel-
lite transmission had made possible 
instantaneous national exposure for  
recording artists as well as worldwide  
simultaneous broadcast of performances. 
At the same time, the global penetration of portable cassette technology provided 
for individualized reception anywhere  
in the world.
U.S. sales fluctuated, bottoming out at $3.6 billion in 1982. International sales followed a similar 
trajectory, falling 18 percent in three years, from $11.4 billion in 1980 to $9.4 billion in 1983.2
Though hardly the stock market crash of 1929, the decline in revenues was significant 
for an enterprise that had more than doubled in size in the preceding five years. Within the first five months of decline, 700 record company employees lost their jobs.
3 Between 1980 and 1986, 
c
BS alone eliminated over 7,000 positions worldwide.4 Production became more restrictive, 
making it harder for new acts to break into the business. One estimate suggests that record companies signed about 50 percent fewer artists during the recession than they had previ-
ously.
5 Accordingly, the number of new U.S. releases was cut nearly in half over the six-year 
period from 1978 (4,170) to 1984 (2,170).6
A number of reasons were proffered for the slump. The industry itself favored home tap -
ing and piracy as the best explanations. Home taping of music (considered illegal by the indus -
try) was, by far, the weaker explanation because market research showed that the people buying blank tapes were precisely the people buying music—as it would show, in a later era, that con-
sumers who downloaded free music from the internet were more likely to buy new music. (The introduction of portable cassette players in the form of Walkmans, boom boxes, and car ste-reos had opened up new opportunities for listening to music. By 1983, the year the U.S. music business recovered from the recession, prerecorded cassettes had surpassed record albums in unit sales.) The figures on piracy were more convincing. In 1979, when the U.S. industry was plagued with overstock returns, Al 
c
oury, president of RSO, estimated that 20 to 40 percent of 
the returns to his company were illegal duplicates.7 In 1982, the International Federation of the 
Phonographic Industry (IFPI) estimated piracy at 11 percent of the total market in the United 
States and 
c
anada, 21 percent in Latin America, 30 percent in Africa, and 66 percent in Asia.8
The industry’s explanations tended to omit the possibilities of a less-than-exciting pe-
riod in music, a saturated market, and the failure of its own promotional apparatus. They also failed to note the diversion of their own capital into other ventures, including the burgeoning 
home video market for films and games. In 1982, for example, Warner’s Atari division (maker 
of Pac Man) accounted for two-thirds of total corporate profits, while its recording interests posted losses of over $100 million.
9 A year later, however, the situation was reversed, as Atari 
faced losses in the hundreds of millions of dollars and a pared-down record division was once 
again on its way to financial health. The introduction of the video cassette recorder (V
c
R) in 
the late 1970s had created a home market for films on video. By 1980, Billboard had started its 
Video Sales chart, followed in 1982 by its Video Rentals chart. Many record companies, from 
independents such as RSO, 
c
asablanca, and Island to major conglomerates such as Warner 
c
ommunications and 
c
BS, had developed film divisions and were bet-
ting on strong connections among film, video, and music in the near future. V
c
R penetration among consumers grew modestly at first but 
approached 75 percent by the end of the decade.
The technological advances of the late 1970s and early 1980s 
were about to transform the way in which music was produced and 
consumed. By the early 1980s, advances in satellite transmission had made possible instantaneous national exposure for recording art-ists as well as worldwide simultaneous broadcast of performances.   M USI c V ID e OS , S UP e RSTARS , A n D  Meg A - eV en TS 287At the same time, the global penetration of portable cassette technology provided for individu-
alized reception anywhere in the world. In the United States, the impact of these new transmis-sion capabilities became apparent in 1981 with the creation of the most powerful music outlet 
ever—MTV .
Early Music Television: They Want Their MTV
The presentation of music in a visual context, be it dancing or a live concert, has long been 
seen as an indispensable part of its promotion. A pop performance is as intrinsically a visual experience as an auditory one. One asks, “Have you ever seen Springsteen live?” not “Have you 
ever heard Springsteen live?” The visual impact of a performance enables music to deliver its 
full measure of pleasure. Many of the first sound films were musicals. For a brief time in the 
1960s, video jukeboxes (the Scopitone in France and the 
c
olor Sonics machine in the United 
States) showed groups performing the selected record. In the late 1970s, it was only logical that the visual context for music should become television.
Of course, television had been used to promote popular music for quite some time. In 
the 1950s and 1960s, recording artists had appeared regularly on family variety shows, and American Bandstand had provided national exposure for rock ‘n’ roll stars. In the 1960s and 1970s, shows like Shindig, Hullabaloo, The Monkees, The Archies, and The Partridge 
 
Family, 
were organized around rock. The Beatles’ promotional film clips for “Penny Lane” and 
“Strawberry Fields” were produced for television and anticipated some of the videographic techniques used in the 1980s. Indeed, the 1975 film clip for Queen’s “Bohemian Rhapsody” is often remembered as the first music video. Music television in the 1980s, however, ushered in a new and innovative era, as video became the standard method for marketing popular music, and offered to viewers a distinctive sort of “synesthetic” experience in which sound and image became inseparable, joined through a range of representational strategies that drew upon documentary and fictional film, commercial advertising, and experimental film and video.
10
The deregulation of television at the start of the 1980s encouraged a massive expan-
sion of cable services throughout the United States and a dramatic increase in the number of 
available channels, all of which required new forms of programming. At the same time, techno-
logical developments enabled the hitherto unconnected media of television, film, and computer 
games to converge under the rubric of “home video.” Soon home stereo was added to the mix, as Robert Pittman, MTV’s founding father, recognized in 1981: “We’re now seeing the TV be-come a component of the stereo system. . . . MTV is the first attempt to make TV a new form, other than video games and data channels.”
11
The U.S. music industry was fairly slow to warm up to music videos—a high-budget 
item with an unknown market. Indeed, music videos never became consumer commodities in 
quite the same way as records, tapes, and compact discs. 
e
ven in 1989, sales of music videos  
were a paltry $115 million in the United States compared to sales of sound recordings at 
$6.5 billion. Still, Pittman and his colleagues recognized that music videos could promote the music itself and deliver potential consumers to advertisers.
288  RO c KI n’ OUTThus, with an initial investment of $20 million, MTV , the first twenty-four-hour music 
video cable channel, was launched on August 1, 1981, by Warner 
c
ommunications and the 
American 
e
xpress 
c
ompany. The channel, described by Marshall 
c
ohen, then vice president 
of marketing, as “the most researched channel in history,” was devoted to the science of demo -
graphics or, to use Pittman’s term, psychographics. With 85 percent of its mostly white subur-
ban viewers falling between the ages of twelve and thirty-four, MTV promised to deliver the perfect consumers for a tight economy.
12 In its first year, 125 sponsors bet on that promise and 
the gamble paid off handsomely. With only 40 percent of the country wired for cable at the 
time, MTV expanded in two years from an initial 2.5 million subscribers to 17 million in 1983, 
becoming the fastest growing cable channel in history. It was unquestionably the most effective 
way for a record to get national exposure.
In his book Dancing in the Distraction Factory, Andrew 
g
oodwin identified three periods 
in MTV’s development.13 The first, 1981 to 1983, was characterized by a twenty-four-hour 
continuous flow of music with little in the way of discrete programs. During this period, MTV 
was, in essence, a visual radio station with an album-oriented rock (AOR) format, no news, and 
continuous music punctuated only by advertisements and the bland patter of the on-camera 
veejays (video jockeys).
The second period, 1983 to 1985, marked a second launch, as the channel became avail-
able in the 
n
ew York and Los Angeles markets for the first time. During this period, a num-
ber of new music video outlets were created to fill in the gaps left by MTV’s rock-oriented programming. Black 
e
ntertainment Television (B
e
T) devoted about six hours per week to 
its Video Soul program, the primary outlet for video exposure of black artists. USA 
c
able 
 n
etwork’s Night Flight showcased the work of some black and Latino acts, while also offering 
music documentaries rarely seen on television at the time. The Nashville Network, which began 
in 1983, offered about eighteen hours of country music daily. WTBS inaugurated Night Tracks, a program that used a kind of Top Forty format. The networks moved into music videos with 
n
B
c
’s Friday Night Videos and AB
c
’s Hot Tracks. Local stations in certain markets like Los 
Angeles also programmed video shows aimed at regional audiences, such as the new wave-
centered Video Beat hosted by radio deejay Richard Blade. MTV bested its U.S. competition at 
this time by negotiating exclusivity arrangements with a number of major record companies, giving it exclusive broadcast rights to certain videos for one month in return for annual pay-ments of hundreds of thousands of dollars. This period marked the beginning of a major com-mitment to heavy metal and the ascendancy of the performance clip, a live performance video in which the interaction between the band and its fans served as an indicator of metal authenticity.
The third period saw a broadening of musical scope and a deeper commitment to youth 
culture. Videos aimed at viewers twenty-five to fifty-four were transferred to the adult-oriented VH-1, a second MTV 
n
etworks music video channel. This period also witnessed the 
departure of Robert Pittman as MTV’s auteur and the abandonment of the continuous flow of music in favor of discrete programming, which would eventually rival the cluttered schedules of the networks.
g
oodwin has astutely pointed out that most studies of MTV have a postmodernist bent 
because they focus disproportionately on the first period and Pittman’s tenure. During the first period, according to 
g
oodwin, the continuous flow of music “blurred the categories of art-rock SEE MORE
MTV documentary on 
MySearchLab M USI c V ID e OS , S UP e RSTARS , A n D  Meg A - eV en TS 289and pop, thus contributing toward a conflation of popular and high-cultural discourses.”14 In 
that period, the U.S. music industry was reluctant to enter the video market, forcing MTV to 
rely on British music videos, which “tended toward the abandonment of narrative” as groups 
“eschewed the bland realism of performance videos.”15
Music videos had developed earlier in Britain because the paucity of radio stations in 
Britain and throughout 
e
urope had caused British record companies to seek exposure for their 
artists on television programs such as Britain’s Top of the Pops. MTV , through these videos 
(or promo clips), offered bands entry to the U.S. market that was less expensive, cumbersome, 
and chancy than transatlantic national tours. The videos were conceived as promotional; they were made by producers and directors from the ranks of advertising and they used market-ing aesthetics—fast cuts, ever-changing camera angles, eye-catching visuals, and a panoply of special effects. This aesthetic is at the heart of the perception that postmodernism had arrived. Adding to this perception was the fact that Britain, at the time, was swept up in the 
n
ew Romantic movement, a 
post-punk phenomenon that combined black r&b, synthesizer pop, and a sense of disco glitz in a strikingly visual and unabashedly commer-
cial package that was well suited to televisual presentation. Drawing on the mechanistic electronic sounds of 
c
an and Kraftwerk from 
g
ermany, 
British acts like 
g
ary 
n
uman and the Human League capitalized on 
the new affordability of synthesizer technology and brought a human-ism to dance-oriented synth-pop further developed by Spandau Ballet (“To 
c
ut a Long Story 
Short”), Depêche Mode (“Just 
c
an’t 
g
et 
e
nough”), Soft 
c
ell (“Tainted Love”), and other 
n
ew 
 
Romantics.16 While the movement itself was short-lived, MTV exposure contributed heavily to 
the success of these groups.
Throughout Pittman’s tenure, MTV devoted a significant portion of its airtime to in-
troducing white rock acts from other 
e
nglish-speaking countries. The channel’s first video, 
“Video Killed the Radio Star,” was by the Buggles, a British group, and Australia’s Men at 
Work owed their U.S. success completely to MTV . Beginning in 1982, the channel showcased 
so many 
e
nglish groups (Adam Ant, Billy Idol, Flock of Seagulls, 
n
ew Order, Thomas Dolby, 
and AB
c
, among many others) that it contributed significantly to what can only be described 
as a second British Invasion. In doing so, MTV propelled Human League’s “Don’t You Want Me?” to number one on the charts. It also rejuvenated the career of the supremely telegenic David Bowie when it placed his video of “Let’s Dance” in heavy rotation (about half a dozen plays per day) in 1983, giving him his first Top Ten hit in seven years.
Other British groups who were proponents of what was called the new pop 
(
 e
urythmics, 
c
ulture 
c
lub, and Duran Duran, among others) also made their U.S. 
 
debuts in 
1983 on MTV and parlayed their exposure into international superstardom. Annie 
 
Lennox 
of 
e
urythmics played with androgyny on “Sweet Dreams” while Boy 
g
eorge of 
c
ulture 
c
lub 
performed gentle, soulful dance cuts like “Do You Really Want to Hurt Me,” “I’ll 
 
Tumble 
4 Ya,” and “Karma 
c
hameleon,” decked out in heavy makeup and flowing female frocks. 
In both 
 
instances, the music was as satisfying as the visual images were striking. It was 
 
Duran Duran, however, that used the visual medium to greater advantage than any other act 
at the time.Britain, at the time, was swept up 
in the New Romantic movement, a 
post-punk phenomenon that combined 
black r&b, synthesizer pop, and a sense 
of disco glitz in a strikingly visual and unabashedly commercial pack-age that was well suited to televisual 
presentation.
290  RO c KI n’ OUTFormed in 1978 around the con-
cept of “the Sex Pistols meets 
c
hic,” 
Duran Duran exuded a stylish, physical 
appeal that was an early indicator of one 
of the prime requirements for video suc-cess.
17 Shortly after the recruitment of 
the alluring Simon Le Bon as lead vocal-
ist in 1980, Duran Duran jumped to the 
head of the 
n
ew Romantic pack. Their 
first video, “
g
irls on Film,” directed by former musicians Kevin 
g
odley and Lol 
c
reme, was 
so steamy/erotic/sexist (depending on one’s perspective) that it was limited in its ability to 
get public exposure, which naturally identified Duran Duran as a group to watch, so to speak. 
The videos for “Rio” and “Hungry Like the Wolf,” released in the United States in 1983, estab-lished them as international superstars. Though group members tried to defend their aesthetic choices as parody, in the eyes of the critics, Duran Duran was clearly eschewing punk’s oppo-sitional politics in favor of jet-set images in exotic locations. The video “Wild Boys,” directed by Russell Mulcahy, was a surrealistic, science-fiction montage that epitomized the advertising 
technique of juxtaposing disparate images.
Thanks in large measure to MTV , the second British Invasion, according to Billboard, 
“became a certifiable matter of public record on July 16, 1983, upon which date no fewer than eighteen singles of British origin charted in the American Top Forty, topping the previous high of fourteen, set on July 18, 1965.”
18 While many British videos were, in fact, visually more 
interesting than their U.S. counterparts, MTV’s selection process favored British groups at the 
expense of U.S. artists—especially African American ones. Britain’s Thompson Twins (“In the  
n
ame of Love”) was one of the few integrated groups to appear on the channel. A tally of 
Billboard ’s MTV listings showed that, of nearly 100 videos aired the week of July 16, 1983, 
none by African American artists were in heavy rotation or medium rotation and no new ones 
had been added to the playlist. 
n
o concerts or specials by African American artists had been 
shown in the history of the channel. Of the U.S. videos shown, the only African American one was Donna Summer’s “She Works Hard for the Money,” which was in light rotation. Overall, only three black acts (all from other countries) were in medium or heavy rotation.
19
The channel was roundly trashed in the popular press for its racism, which People maga -
zine summed up in one line: “On MTV’s current roster of some 800 acts, 16 are black.”20 MTV As Eurythmics, Annie Lennox and Dave Stewart offered 
considerable talent and a fresh sound, while Lennox called attention to gender roles as she played with 
androgyny.
 M USI c V ID e OS , S UP e RSTARS , A n D  Meg A - eV en TS 291executives claimed that few black artists recorded the kind of rock ‘n’ roll that their format 
required. The argument was circular: If the channel’s format targeted a largely white suburban audience, then the format itself was racially biased—it could not be used to explain away the 
racial bias. Furthermore, how could MTV justify programming Phil 
c
ollins’s note-for-note 
cover of the Supremes’ “You 
c
an’t Hurry Love” when Motown acts were getting no airplay? 
On what basis was Hall and Oates’s r&b crossover music considered rock ‘n’ roll if r&b cross-
overs by African American artists were not? The channel’s racism was exposed on the air when David Bowie caught veejay Mark 
g
oodman off guard with a question about the lack of 
black artists on the channel. Replied 
g
oodman: “Of course, also we have to try and do what 
we think not only 
n
ew York and Los Angeles will appreciate, but also Poughkeepsie or the 
Midwest. Pick some town in the Midwest which would be scared to death by Prince, which we’re playing, or a string of other black faces, or black music.”
21
Perhaps the most blatant act of racial exclusion was MTV’s rejection of five Rick James 
videos at a time when his album Street Songs had sold almost 4 million copies. An MTV spokes-
person gave the standard reply: “We play rock and roll. We don’t play Rick James because he’s 
funk.”22 The response was particularly unconvincing because MTV was playing Prince heav-
ily at the time. While the case could certainly be made that James had a “blacker” sound than 
Prince, trying to set a rigid outer limit on rock ‘n’ roll somewhere between Prince’s “Little Red 
c
orvette” and James’s “Superfreak” could only be considered an exercise in hair splitting. Of 
course, one possible explanation was the fact that Prince was signed to Warner, an MTV par -
ent company, while Rick James recorded for Motown. In any case, at the time, MTV steadfastly 
continued its refusal of Rick James videos.
Michael Jackson and the incredible success of Thriller 
finally blew MTV’s format argument out of the water. Jackson had already demonstrated his crossover appeal as a member of the Jackson 5 on Motown and as a solo art-ist on 
e
pic. His first 
e
pic album, Off the Wall (1979), pro-
duced by Quincy Jones, sold multiplatinum, yielded four 
Top Ten singles, and signaled Jackson’s shift from child star to grown-up dance-pop artist for whom disco was one point of reference among many. Still, the album was only a warm-up for Thriller, which was number one for 
Because of criticism over reported physical alterations, charges 
of alleged child abuse, and unfavorable coverage of his failed marriage to Lisa Marie Presley, it is easy to lose sight of the 
fact that Michael Jackson once broke down racial barriers, set 
unimaginable sales records, and provided the inspiration and leadership for charity rock in the United States.
292  RO c KI n’ OUTthirty-seven weeks in 1983 and generated an unprecedented seven Top Ten singles. It also 
accounted for a record twelve 
g
rammy Awards in 1983. In fact, Thriller set so many records 
that a consideration of its artistic merit can easily get buried under its impressive statistics. 
Musically, Thriller was a tour de force. Its songs and arrangements 
were well crafted, its production was crisp and uncluttered, its dance 
grooves were positively infectious, and Jackson’s vocals were flawless. On Thriller, Michael Jackson demonstrated the versatility that should have earned him the title King of Pop, but given the racial politics of fame, he could only capture it by crowning himself a decade later.
The album had something for just about everyone. Its first hit was “The 
g
irl Is Mine,” an 
upbeat pop duet with Paul Mc
c
artney that was guaranteed to pull in a middle-of-the-road, adult 
rock audience. “Billie Jean” followed, an exquisitely pulsing rocker with obvious dance floor ap-
peal that was number one for seven weeks, to be displaced by “Beat It,” an overture to hard 
rockers that used 
e
ddie Van Halen on guitar. As “Beat It” began its descent from the number  
one slot, Jackson appeared on Motown 25, a TV special celebrating Motown’s twenty-fifth anniversary. The show, aired May 16, 1983, reunited first- and second-generation Motown acts such as Stevie Wonder, Marvin 
g
aye, the Supremes, the Temptations, the Four Tops, and the 
Jacksons, all of whom, except Wonder, had long since departed the label. Performing “Billie Jean,” the only non-Motown song of the evening, Michael teased his audience to shrieks of delight, donning a black fedora that seemed to appear from nowhere. He then launched into  
a dance routine that married the fluidity of Fred Astaire with the acrobatics of break danc-ing, unleashing his now fabled moonwalk for the first time. 
n
ot since the Beatles appeared on 
e
d Sullivan, perhaps, had a single televised performance had such impact, and sales of Thriller  
soared beyond all known records.
e
ven so, MTV at first refused to air the “Billie Jean” or “Beat It” videos. On “Billie Jean,” 
advertising veteran Steve Barron portrayed Jackson as a shadowy figure who leads a private detective through a surreal street scene and vanishes into thin air just as he is about to be captured. Bob 
g
iraldi, also from the world of advertising, shot “Beat It” as a straight ensemble 
dance number that reportedly used real Los Angeles gang members as well as professional dancers. Both videos made as good use of the medium as any British video, but still MTV re-sisted. Whether because of the overwhelming popularity of “Billie Jean” or, as widely rumored, because 
c
BS Records threatened to pull all its videos from MTV unless the channel aired 
Jackson’s videos, MTV finally relented. Both proceeded to become two of the most popular videos ever—“Billie Jean” is widely remembered as the video that broke the color line on MTV .
Having spent $150,000 on the production of “Beat It”—when most videos cost $35,000 
to $45,000—Jackson went on to push production costs to the limit by hiring film director John Landis to shoot a $300,000, fifteen-minute version of “Thriller.” Featuring elaborate makeup effects by Rick Baker that showed Jackson mutating into a zombie, “Thriller” was one of sev-eral videos in which the singer underwent “monstrous transformations” that seemed to parallel the physical changes he undertook through his ever-evolving series of plastic surgeries.
23 eight 
years later, in the video for “Black and White,” he would make race an explicit subject of such 
transformation, using digital technology to present a multiracial series of faces (including his 
own) morphing into one another, as though the racial color line was just another special effect.HEAR MORE
Thriller on 
MySearchLabOn Thriller, Michael Jackson demon-
strated the versatility that should have 
earned him the title King of Pop, but 
given the racial politics of fame, he 
could only capture it by crowning him-self a decade later.
Listening Guide 25Funk, disco, and metal meet with visceral force in “Beat It,” one of the 
many huge hits from Michael Jackson’s 1983 LP Thriller. The precision 
disco beat and catchy “hook,” laid down by L.A.’s finest studio musicians, 
was further enhanced by a pyrotechnic metal guitar solo by Eddie Van  
Halen, whose appearance prefigured future Jackson collaborations with rock guitarists such as Steve Stevens (on “Dirty Diana,” 1987) and Slash (on “Black and White,” 1991).
Often considered the high point of Jackson’s career, Thriller and 
its spin-off videos wedded the masterful production and arrangement skills 
of producer Quincy Jones with the James Brown–influenced dance and vocal virtuosity that was evident in Jackson even as a ten-year-old Motown star. Both the LP and the videos were lavish, expensive productions, and the associated musi-cal mini-movies raised the bar for music videos in general. Thriller catapulted Jackson through the race barrier of white-dominated AOR radio and 1980s MTV , and broke the field of music video wide open for the next wave of funk-influenced African American artists such as Prince.
Musical Style Notes
The backbone of the song “Beat It” is provided by a disco-style electronic drum track, synthesizers, and drum set (played 
by Steve and Jeff Porcaro of the band Toto), over which a repetitive and compelling melodic vamp is played by Steve  Lukather (also of Toto, who plays both guitar and bass on the track) and guitarist Paul Jackson. Adding to the texture  
are multiple keyboards, played by Bill Wolfer and Greg Phillinganes (of Stevie Wonder’s Wonderlove Band). Layered over 
this are Michael Jackson’s multitracked vocals and Eddie Van Halen’s guitar solo.
The musical structure is straightforward and typical of song forms found in both rock and disco—verse-verse-chorus—
with an improvisatory section (the guitar solo) followed by the repetition of several choruses (see the table below in this text).
Fun fact: At 2:45 you can hear something that sounds like knocking on a door and then a door closing. Legend 
has it that this was an engineer who didn’t realize Van Halen was about to begin recording his solo.
Musical “Road Map”
Timings Commen T s
0:00–0:11 Introduction—synthesized gong sound followed by sharp rhythmic synth hits.
0:11 Synthesized disco style
Drum track enters.
0:25–0:39 Repeating guitar/bass vamp begins.
0:39–0:53 Verse 1
0:53–1:06 Verse 2
1:06–1:27 Chorus(All parts sung by Jackson.)
1:27–1:41 Verse 3
1:41–1:55 Verse 4
1:55–2:29 Chorus
2:29–2:49 Instrumental interlude providing a transition to the guitar solo.
(Listen for the knocking at 2:45.)
2:49–3:18 Eddie Van Halen’s guitar solo
3:18–4:17 “Beat it” chorus begins again and repeats until the end of the track.“Beat It”
Artist:
 
Michael Jackson
Music/Lyrics by Michael Jackson 
(with Quincy Jones)
Label:
 
Epic (1983), from the 
LP Thriller
 M USI c V ID e OS , S UP e RSTARS , A n D  Meg A - eV en TS 293294  RO c KI n’ OUTWhile charges of racism provided MTV with its first contro-
versy, the treatment of women and the portrayal of gender roles in 
music videos overall have generated the longest running debates. The 
vast majority of MTV videos, particularly in the early years, were by 
white men aiming for a white male audience; women in these videos 
were used to hook young male viewers. 
e
arly examples include the J. 
g
eils Band’s “
c
enter-
fold,” ZZ Top’s “Legs,” Van Halen’s “Hot for Teacher,” and Robert Palmer’s “ Addicted to Love.” 
g
iven videos’ promotional nature and the fact that many directors came from advertising—
where it is axiomatic that sex sells—the sexism in these efforts cannot be attributed to in-nocent experimentation with a new art form. As Kevin 
g
odley, codirector of Duran Duran’s 
“
g
irls on Film,” has noted, “People are always accusing that video of sexism, and of course 
they’re right. . . .We were very explicitly told by Duran Duran’s management to make a very 
sensational, erotic piece that would be for clubs, where it could get shown uncensored, just to make people take notice and talk about it.”
24
However, the objectification of women in music videos was not uniform, monolithic, or 
fixed. As one example, Madonna was routinely taken to task for objectifying herself in her 
early videos (“Like a Virgin,” “Material 
g
irl”). She defended the practice on the basis that she 
was in control of her image, and critics and her audience have since claimed her as a progres-
sive rock star. “Material 
g
irl,” in particular, has been subjected to more scholarly (and mostly 
feminist) rereadings than any other video.25 early music videos sometimes challenged the tra-
ditional images of men and women. Annie Lennox and Boy 
g
eorge played with androgyny, as 
mentioned earlier in this text, and so too did the British 
n
ew Romantics—Duran Duran drew 
as much attention for their glamorous, effeminate good looks as their exploitation of women. 
g
irl-next-door Olivia 
n
ewton-John released one of the most popular, if overexposed, videos of 
the decade, “Physical,” which ended somewhat ironically with gay male couples leaving a gym 
arm-in-arm.
c
yndi Lauper, Donna Summer, and Pat Benatar tried different ways of giving a voice to 
women. The title of Lauper’s debut album, She’s So Unusual (1984), aptly described the singer with the extreme 
n
ew York accent, rainbow-colored hair, and thrift-shop fashions. Lauper’s 
three-octave range gave her four Top Ten hits in a row and propelled her to instant, if short-lived, superstardom. On the video of her first hit, “
g
irls Just Wanna Have Fun,” shot in her 
own home with her real mother, Lauper resisted the confines of traditional feminine roles and 
used imaginative computer graphics to make the point. Donna Summer’s “She Works Hard for the Money” depicted a single, working mother oppressed on the job and faced with the drudg-ery of housework and ungrateful kids. The bleakness of her life is eased at the end of the video as women from all walks of life gather together to dance in the streets. Pat Benatar’s “Love Is a Battlefield” took a similar line. In the video, Benatar portrays a young woman thrown out of her suburban home by unbending parents and forced to work in an urban brothel. She finds strength when she intervenes on behalf of a friend threatened by a surly patron. The video ends with the women dancing defiantly into the street, expressing both female solidarity and the pleasure of dancing together.
MTV debuted at exactly the right time for a music industry battling a recession. By late 
1982, record companies could count on a 10 to 15 percent increase in sales for acts that debuted While charges of racism provided MTV 
with its first controversy, the treatment 
of women and the portrayal of gender 
roles in music videos overall have gener-
ated the longest running debates.
 M USI c V ID e OS , S UP e RSTARS , A n D  Meg A - eV en TS 295on MTV . Stray c ats sold about 2 million copies of Built for Speed (1982) on the strength of the 
videos for “Rock This Town” and “Stray 
c
at Strut.” The engaging video for the 
g
reg Kihn 
Band’s “Jeopardy” shot the single to number two in 1982. By the week of October 10, 1983, 
seventeen of Billboard ’s Top Twenty albums had videos on MTV . The impact of the channel 
could partly be attributed to one significant way that it differed from radio. “We play 80 percent 
new music, 20 percent old,” boasted Robert Pittman. “Radio is just the opposite.”26 Radio recog -
nized MTV’s power and often added new artists on the basis of video success. This trend indi-
cated that breaking new artists could have been the music industry’s way out of the recession, 
but the major record companies adopted a different and far less democratic strategy.
Superstars: The Road to Economic Recovery
By 1983, the combination of the recession, the U.S. music industry’s slowness in embracing 
music videos, and MTV’s reliance on white British acts and its unwillingness to air African American artists had resulted in U.S. pop charts that listed little U.S. music. Boston Globe  
critic Steve Morse noted, “The American pop charts these days have a shocking lack of true 
 American music—especially country rock, blues, soul, rockabilly, folk and rhythm and blues. 
Or for that matter, black funk and rap music—two more recent styles that have been unable to transcend cult status.”
27
At the same time, as a result of the multiracial programming of Urban c ontemporary 
stations and MTV’s preponderance of new music, AOR radio—now the most conservative and 
segregated format in radio—experienced a significant decline.28 Responding to these  pressures, 
Lee Abrams, AOR’s founder, unveiled a new format called Superstars 83. By year’s end, 
 
Superstars 83 had been radically revised—ironically, following MTV’s reluctant and belated 
lead—to include black crossover acts like Lionel Richie, Donna Summer, 
e
ddy 
g
rant, Prince, 
and, of course, Michael Jackson. The appearance of black artists on AOR stations suggested 
some new developments in the music industry.
In 1978, five transnational music corporations—R
c
A, 
c
BS, Warner, 
e
MI, and Polygram— 
controlled, through ownership, licensing, and/or distribution, more than 70 
 
percent of an in-
ternational music market worth over $10 billion.29 Both c BS and R c A had reported in 1977 
that more than half of their sales came from their international divisions; at the time, however, 
a marked division still existed between artists aimed at the domestic market and those mar-
keted primarily outside the United States. The surprisingly high international sales figures 
of the late 1970s were the result of international artists outselling domestic artists. (Spanish balladeer Julio Iglesias, for example, barely made a dent in the U.S. market in the 1970s, even though he lived in the United States and was the best-selling artist in the world at the time.) Despite good international sales in the 1970s, the domestic market was still the main focus of U.S. record companies.
The systematic exploitation of the world market as a condition of further growth did 
not become dominant until the 1980s. Key to this development was the recognition that the industry’s recovery that began in 1983 “was due more to the runaway success of a handful of 
smash hits than to an across-the-board pickup in album sales.”
30 Of course, nothing embodied 
296  RO c KI n’ OUTthis reality better than Thriller. By 1984, when domestic sales of $4.4 billion indicated that 
the U.S. music industry had at least returned to its 1978 level of prosperity, Thriller was 
on its way to becoming the best-selling album of all time, eventually reaching sales conser-
vatively estimated to be 65 million units worldwide (and less conservatively placed at over 
100 million). Its success triggered an era of blockbuster LPs featuring a limited number of superstar artists as the solution to the industry’s economic woes. Thriller thus underscored 
the two most salient aspects of the industry’s recovery: concentration of product and expan -
sion into international markets.
Of course, globalization affected the treatment of artists at home. “Increasingly, the big 
record companies are concentrating their resources behind fewer acts,” reported the Wall Street Journal, “believing that it is easier to succeed with a handful of blockbuster hits than with a slew of moderate sellers.”
31 Accordingly, in 1984, Warner Records dropped over thirty artists 
from its roster, including Arlo 
g
uthrie, Van Morrison, and Bonnie Raitt, 
who were not quite up to par in terms of sales. (Some, like Raitt, went on 
to achieve their greatest successes at other labels.) The major labels could 
have begun scouring the world for new, exciting, and diverse talent, but instead that became a task for independent labels. In the cost-cutting fever generated by the recession, major companies looked to reap greater rewards from fewer artists.
If 1983 belonged to Michael Jackson, 1984 was the year of Prince. Just as Jackson would 
become the King of Pop, Prince was the heir apparent to Little Richard, Jimi Hendrix, and Sly Stone. 
c
omparing Prince to Hendrix, 
c
harles Shaar Murray observed that unlike his pre-
decessor, who started on the soul circuit and then drew the notice of rock fans, Prince was 
promoted simultaneously among fans of both rock and funk from the start. With his success, “he reinvented a concept which had virtually atrophied; the black rocker.”
32 Born of an inter-
racial union in middle-class, middle-American Minneapolis, Prince Rogers 
n
elson, known at 
the time as Prince, was signed to Warner in 1978 and granted an unprecedented degree of 
artistic autonomy for a teenager who used music as a vehicle for some very strange notions 
about sexuality and religion. His first albums were entirely self-written, self-played, and self-produced, and he sang all his own songs. The breakthrough Dirty Mind (1980) contained odes to incest (“Sister”) and oral sex (“Head”), as well as the new wave rock classic “When You Were Mine,” which was subsequently covered by 
c
yndi Lauper. Prince seemed quite at home 
appearing in concerts in black lace underpants, backed by the provocative female trio Vanity. For the double LP 1999 (1982), Prince moved closer to the rock mainstream, producing three major hits, including “Little Red 
c
orvette,” which became one of the first videos by an African 
American artist to air on MTV . However, it was not until Purple Rain (1984) that Prince was 
finally crowned.
For Purple Rain, Prince assembled the Revolution, a new band that was integrated 
racially and sexually. Released as both an album and a film of the same name, Purple Rain  was 
the kind of triumph of cross-media marketing that Robert Stigwood would have envied. Before the movie opened, “When Doves 
c
ry,” the album’s first single, had already reached number 
one; “Let’s 
g
o 
c
razy” hit number one shortly thereafter. The title song was then released and 
rose to number two. All in all, the soundtrack album, which sold 14 million copies, yielded five The major labels could have begun 
scouring the world for new, exciting, 
and diverse talent, but instead that be-
came a task for independent labels. In 
the cost-cutting fever generated by the recession, major companies looked to reap greater rewards from fewer artists.
 M USI c V ID e OS , S UP e RSTARS , A n D  Meg A - eV en TS 297hit singles for Prince and two more for the Time, while the movie video sold half a million 
units within six months of its release. The album’s artistry was impressive. The stark rhythms of “When Doves 
c
ry” and the frenzied pace of “Let’s 
g
o 
c
razy” seemed to play fast and loose 
with the rules of pop, yet both reached number one. On video, Prince unleashed some dance 
moves that approached Jackson’s finesse, and guitar playing that rivaled the best of the heavy metal virtuosos. It was Prince’s finest hour.
Purple Rain’s occupation of the number one position for twenty-four weeks delayed Bruce 
Springsteen’s entrance into the top slot. Born in the U.S.A., released about the same time as Purple Rain, ascended to number one and tied Thriller’s record of generating seven Top Ten singles. The album remained in the Top Forty for nearly two years, eventually selling some 15 million copies in the United States and making Springsteen the hottest artist of 1985.
Unlike many other superstars, Springsteen always felt more comfortable on stage than 
on video. An early clip for “ Atlantic 
c
ity,” from his acoustic Nebraska album, was a black-and-
white collage of mundane images of the Atlantic 
c
ity boardwalk, parking lots, and casino 
scenes; Springsteen himself never appeared. Springsteen’s mix of blue-collar rock ‘n’ roll with 
socially conscious 1960s romanticism allowed him to project the persona of a working-class hero without pretense, even as he carried home tens of millions of dollars from the sale of Born in the U.S.A. On that album, Springsteen brought together the unbridled energy of Despite the fact that Prince projected a 
mysterious and seductive R-rated persona in the early 1980s, his music still took the 
mainstream by storm.
Listening Guide 26“Born in the U.S.A.”
Artist:
 
Bruce Springsteen
Music/Lyrics by Bruce Springsteen
Label:
 
Columbia (1984)What makes a rock ‘n’ roll anthem? The term anthem originally referred 
to a sacred vocal piece, usually sung by a church choir. Over the years, 
anthem has come to refer to songs that have symbolic, cultural, or spiritual 
meaning (for example, national anthems like the “Star-Spangled Banner”). 
There are particular songs in the history of rock ‘n’ roll that have gener-ated a strong experience of cultural identity or community. (It also helps if 
the song has a particularly compelling or hypnotic refrain.) By this definition, 
Bruce Springsteen’s “Born in the U.S.A.” is one of the major rock anthems of the early 1980s.
“Born in the U.S.A.” is written from the point of view of a Vietnam vet in the late 1970s and early 1980s, hav-
ing come home to rejection, hardship, and discrimination in the workplace. The song also underscores the fact that it was largely working-class and minority Americans who fought in Vietnam. However, the irony of this song’s history is the frequency with which it has been misinterpreted. In 1984, conservative columnist George Will held it up as a shining example of conservative American values; shortly thereafter, President Reagan made a famous reference to the song in a re-election speech. The song is still sometimes misread as militantly “pro-America, right-or-wrong,” usually by people who 
know only the words of the refrain and have filled in the blanks themselves.
Musical Style Notes
“Born in the U.S.A.” has an interesting asymmetrical structure. While it’s basically an example of a verse and refrain  
form, there are instances in which the refrain (“Born in the U.S.A.”) is played but not sung, and in one case, a verse  that is extended by a couple of lines, which draws the ear of the listener to that particular verse (“I had a brother at  
Khe Sahn … ”). The band also changes the musical texture at certain points, adding and dropping instruments, which 
lends expressive color to different parts of the text.
The powerful beginning consists of the refrain tune, played by Roy Bittan on keyboard synthesizer and Max  
Weinberg on drums. (This huge, reverberant drum sound was very popular in the early 1980s and can be heard in the  
recordings of many other artists, notably Phil Collins.) The other members of the “Born in the U.S.A.” version of the  
E Street Band are Clarence Clemons, saxophone; Danny Federici, keyboards; Bruce Springsteen, guitar and lead vocals; Garry Tallent, bass; and Steven Van Zandt, guitar and vocals.
298  RO c KI n’ OUTListening Guide 26Musical “Road Map”
Timings Commen T s
0:00–0:17 Introduction
Keyboard synthesizer and drums, playing the tune of the “Born in the U.S.A.” refrain.
0:17–0:33 Verse 1 (Bruce Springsteen, vocals)
0:33–0:49 Refrain
0:49–1:04 Verse 2
Entrance of entire band; sound texture thickens.
1:04–1:20 Refrain
1:20–1:36 Verse 3
1:36–1:53 Refrain music, without words
1:52–2:22 Verse 4
Note the slightly longer verse—there is no expected line of text after “He’s all gone.”The next two lines correspond in length to the second half of the other verses.
2:22–2:39 Verse 5Band drops out; drums synth.
2:39–2:55 Refrain
2:55–3:11 RefrainWhole band reenters here.
3:11–3:57 Instrumental refrain, three timesWhole band
3:42 (Springsteen yelling in background.)
3:57–4:12 Synthesizer and bass continue refrain.Music; guitar (free form)Drum solos under synth and bass.
4:12–4:37 Whole band reenters, still playing refrain.Sound gradually fades.
 M USI c V ID e OS , S UP e RSTARS , A n D  Meg A - eV en TS 299300  RO c KI n’ OUTBorn to Run  and the sober portraits of everyday life that comprised 
Nebraska. In “
g
lory Days” he sang with passion about the troubles of 
a former high-school baseball star and a divorced prom queen. “My 
Hometown” was a thoughtful, searching ballad about the deindus-
trialization of small-town America. “Born in the U.S.A.” was a wail about the racism and senselessness of the Vietnam War and the cruel fate that befell its veterans. The song’s hook line was so powerful (and so ambiguous) that both the Republican and Democratic presidential 
candidates in 1984 tried to appropriate the song. Springsteen avoided endorsing either of them, concentrating instead on playing benefit concerts to raise money for food banks, soup kitchens, striking miners, and unemployed steelworkers.
Whitney Houston outsold Springsteen, but she never reached his heights as a political 
icon or culture hero. The daughter of soul singer 
c
issy Houston and a cousin of Dionne 
Warwick, Houston, an actress and a model before coming to the attention of 
c
live Davis at 
Arista Records, was made for music television. Because few black acts, particularly black female 
acts, were aired, however, her promotional clips were few and far between. 
e
ven so, the playful 
video for “How Will I Know” helped to maintain her 1985 self-titled debut album in the Top 
Forty for seventy-eight weeks after it had entered the charts at number one. By the time she 
released “Where Do Broken Hearts 
g
o” from her second album, Whitney, she had tallied seven 
number one hit singles in a row, a feat unheard of since the Beatles.
Houston had Aretha Franklin’s range and power but tended to play it safe as an art-
ist, thus emerging more as pop entertainer than soul diva. “Saving All My Love for You” and “Didn’t We Almost Have It All” were fairly standard pop ballads. “How Will I Know” 
and “I Wanna Dance with Somebody” were middle-of-the-road, if somewhat spirited, dance 
numbers. What made these songs work as well as they did was Houston’s infectious delivery. In this, she was a lot like her cousin Dionne Warwick, who could transform the most vacu -
ous pop material into something soulful. Had she been more adventurous in her material, she might have approached Aretha Franklin’s stature as an artist, rather than just topping her sales figures.
Lionel Richie was another superstar of this period. As a founding member of the 
c
ommodores—playing saxophone and then becoming lead vocalist and main songwriter—he 
was a versatile performer whose goal had always been maximum crossover. “Three Times a Lady,” a 
g
rammy-nominated number one hit for the 
c
ommodores, even earned Richie a 
country songwriter award from AS
c
AP in 1978. He went solo in 1981 under the tutelage of 
Kenny Rogers’s manager, Ken Kragen. In 1983, Richie released Can’t Slow Down, which went to number one in the middle of Michael Jackson mania and remained in the Top Forty for seventy-eight weeks. The album sold 10 million copies and generated five Top Ten singles, including “ All 
n
ight Long (All 
n
ight)” and “Hello,” which reached number one, aided by MTV 
videos. Had it not been overshadowed by Thriller, the album would have been the talk of the industry. After “ All 
n
ight Long (All 
n
ight),” Richie’s hits tended to be well within the bounds 
of pop convention, including those with movie tie-ins and high-tech videos.
Madonna combined good promotion, danceable material, engaging choreography, and vi-
sual appeal into just the kind of superstar package that the industry wanted. Between 1984 and “Born in the U.S.A.” was a wail about 
the racism and senselessness of the 
Vietnam War and the cruel fate that 
befell its veterans. The song’s hook line 
was so powerful (and so ambiguous) that both the Republican and  Democratic presidential candidates  
in 1984 tried to appropriate the song.
Listening Guide 27From her disco beginnings to her most recent work, Madonna’s music 
has always been about dance. Her intense personal style and charisma, 
ultrasexual image, pioneering fashion sense, controversial use of religious 
iconography, and chameleon-like changes in persona are all part of her 
unique mystique. Musically, however, this Italian American’s roots are in African American musical genres. The beat is straight out of disco, and the song structures are straight out of soul and even out of Motown, punctu-
ated with the melismatic “wooo-hooos” of a gospel singer.
“Like a Virgin” was Madonna’s first number one single (and  
remained at number one on the Billboard charts for six weeks in 1984).  
The “Like a Virgin” video was also extremely successful, despite controversy about its sexual content, and it helped  
catapult her to worldwide fame. One of the most successful artists of the last three decades, Madonna has sold over 300 million records internationally.
Musical Style Notes
The introduction to “Like a Virgin,” with its compelling bass-synth pattern, establishes its dance beat immediately. The 
prevailing sonic texture of disco is also evident in the instrumentation, heavy on synthesizer and keyboards. The verses of “Like a Virgin” have a two-part structure. We hear eight bars (measures) of music and lyrics, followed by another eight 
bars that feature the same music but with different lyrics, continuing into a chorus, which is also eight bars long. This 
musical structure, while found frequently in disco, is also found in a lot of Motown songs; in fact, the structure, harmony, and rhythm of “Like a Virgin” are reminiscent of a number of Motown hits (listen again to the beginning introduction, and compare it with the beginning of the Four Tops’ 1965 hit “Sugar Pie Honey Bunch”). “Like a Virgin” is a particularly good 
illustration of the way in which elements of different African American genres—r&b, soul, Motown, and disco—combined 
to create the building blocks of 1980s dance music.
The players on “Like a Virgin” are bassist Bernard Edwards, guitarist Nile Rodgers, drummer Tony Thompson, 
synth/keyboardist Rob Sabino, and singer Madonna Louise Ciccone.
Musical “Road Map”
Timings Commen T s
0:00–0:07 Synthesized bass and keyboard introduction
0:07–0:43 Verse 1
0:43–1:00 Chorus
1:00–1:35 Verse 2
1:35–1:52 Chorus
1:52–2:08 Instrumental bridge, layered over with melismatic vocal part on the syllables woo hoo.
2:08–2:28 Verse 3 (half as long as previous verses)
2:28–2:44 Chorus
2:44–3:00 The instrumental musical material of the chorus continues, with vocal improvisations, using 
the words of the chorus.
3:00–3:35 Further vocal improvisations over music of the chorus, now using vocal syllables as well as slightly changed lyrics.
(Track fades to ending.)“Like a Virgin”
Artist:
 
Madonna
Music/Lyrics by Billy Steinberg  
and Tom Kelly
Label:
 
Sire, from the LP  
Like a Virgin  (1984)
 M USI c V ID e OS , S UP e RSTARS , A n D  Meg A - eV en TS 301302  RO c KI n’ OUT1987, she had twelve Top Ten hits in a row. n ine of them came from 
two albums, Like a Virgin (1984) and True Blue (1986). Both albums hit 
number one and remained in the Top Forty for a year. Madonna be-
gan her career as a disco diva with dance-floor hits such as “Holiday,” 
“Borderline,” and “Lucky Star” and then used music videos to make the transition to rock star with “Like a Virgin” and “Material 
g
irl.” 
In her videos and live performances, she displayed an adult sexuality 
that inspired lust in teenage boys, emulation in young girls, and outrage in their parents. Her penchant for 
c
hristian iconography sometimes recalled Prince’s uneasy marriage of sex and 
religion. Over the years, she has continued to push sexual expression to the limit of public ac-ceptability and sometimes beyond. She also displayed the influence of gay subcultures in the song and video for “Vogue” (1990), based on a dance style pioneered by gay male drag ball per-
formers such as Willi 
n
inja.33 Ambitious to the core and one of the most astute businesspeople 
in the industry, Madonna has always managed to use controversy to generate sales. All of her 
albums have been certified platinum.
A handful of other artists had extraordinary chart runs that generated similar mega-
sales. Their multiplatinum figures represented a dramatic statement of how concentrated the 
industry had become. Interestingly, for many of these artists—the Pointer Sisters certainly come to mind—this period represented some of their best work. In some respects, the indus-try had come full circle and returned to the days before rock became art, when albums were aggregates of singles. In those early days, however, LPs were crammed with filler in order to sell the artist’s current hit at a higher price. In the 1980s, albums were carefully constructed repositories of quality material—designed not as conceptual wholes like Sgt. Pepper but 
as time-release capsules, with individual cuts marketed to the public at precise moments. The goal was not to sell the single—singles had become largely promotional—but to keep the album in circulation and on the pop charts for months on end. As we have seen, music television and cross-media marketing, particularly movie tie-ins, were crucial to this development. (See tables below in this text for additional information.)
HEAR MORE
Audio links for 
long-running Top Forty Albums on MySearchLabMadonna began her career as a disco 
diva and then used music videos to 
make the transition to rock star. In her 
videos and live performances, she dis-
played an adult sexuality that inspired lust in teenage boys, emulation in young girls, and outrage in their parents.
Throughout her career, Madonna has tested the limits of 
acceptable sexual expression. A talented dance/pop diva as well as a consummate businesswoman, she has always 
managed to turn controversy into record sales.
 M USI c V ID e OS , S UP e RSTARS , A n D  Meg A - eV en TS 303ArTis T Album (Ye A r) Top For TY  Ch A r T  r un
Michael Jackson Thriller (1983) Ninety-one weeks
Huey Lewis and the News Sports (1983) Seventy-one weeks
Lionel Richie Can’t Slow Down (1983) Seventy-eight weeks
Madonna Like A Virgin (1984) Fifty-two weeks
True Blue (1986) Fifty-two weeks
Billy Ocean Suddenly (1984) Fifty-seven weeks
Pointer Sisters Breakout (1984) Sixty-five weeks
Bruce Springsteen Born in the U.S.A. (1984) Ninety-six weeks
Tina Turner Private Dancer (1984) Seventy-one weeks
Wham! Make It Big (1984) Fifty-six weeks
Phil Collins No Jacket Required (1985) Seventy weeks
Whitney Houston Whitney Houston (1985) Seventy-eight weeks
Anita Baker Rapture (1986) Seventy-two weeks
Janet Jackson Control (1986) Seventy-seven weeks
Steve Winwood Back in the High Life (1986) Sixty weeksSelected Albums with One-Year Top Forty Chart Runs, 1983–1986
chris Blackwell explained in 1986, “If you’re in the entertainment business on the music 
side, you really need to be in films as well because I think they’re really joining into one busi-
ness.”34 In this way, too, the industry had come full circle. Just as Tin Pan Alley had solidified 
its dominance through its relationship with Hollywood films in the 1930s and 1940s, record 
companies now did so in the 1980s. Indeed, with the advent of what film music scholar Jeff 
Smith has called the “compilation score”—a score comprised not of composed classical film 
music but of a collection of popular songs—music had become so integral to films that it affected how they were made.
35 In the 1970s, Saturday Night Fever (the film) had made it diffi-
cult to hear the Bee 
g
ees’ “Stayin’ Alive” without imagining John Travolta strutting down the 
streets of Brooklyn. Flashdance and Footloose created similar associations in the 1980s; the 1987 
sleeper hit Dirty Dancing completed the fusion of music and film. Dirty Dancing’s soundtrack 
music became the focal point of the film. Bob Buziak, the R
c
A president who authorized both 
film and soundtrack, noted at the time:
The movie Back to the Future grossed $150 million and had a No. 1 single with Huey Lewis; 
the soundtrack album only sold 600,000. That’s because the music was “wallpapered” into the movie, and the songs were not an essential part of the emotional experience. For a soundtrack to be really successful—like Top 
g
un or The Big 
c
hill—you have to hear what you see.36
By harnessing all the technology and marketing tools at its disposal, the music industry 
created a small, internationally popular roster of superstars who could generate unheard-of HEAR MORE
Audio links for Top Ten 
Hits with Movie Tie-Ins on MySearchLab304  RO c KI n’ OUTprofits. Revenues increased steadily after 1983, even though total unit sales declined from 
680 million in 1984 to 618 million in 1986. In other words, the U.S. music business was making more money selling fewer recordings. This development was aided by another technological 
advance: the compact disc (
c
D), introduced simultaneously by Sony and Phillips in the late 
1970s. As a digital configuration, the 
c
D promised better sound quality and ease of use than 
either records or tapes. Although 
c
Ds cost no more to produce than records or tapes, demand 
allowed companies to charge more for them. In 1986, “[t]he sale of 53 million 
c
Ds generated 
almost as much income ($930 million) as the 125 million LPs sold ($983 million).”37
Selected Top Ten Hits with Movie Tie-Ins, 1984–1986
ArTis T s ong (Ye A r) m ovie
Phil Collins “Against All Odds (Take a Look at Me Now)” (1984) Against All Odds
Kenny Loggins “Footloose” (1984) Footloose
Pointer Sisters “Neutron Dance” (1984) Beverly Hills Cop
Huey Lewis and the News “The Power of Love” (1985) Back to the Future
Billy Ocean “When the Going Gets Tough, the Tough Get Going” (1985) Jewel of the Nile
Lionel Richie “Say You, Say Me” (1985) White Nights
Tina Turner “We Don’t Need Another Hero (Thunderdome)” (1985) Mad Max: Beyond Thunderdome
Berlin “Take My Breath Away” (1986) Top Gun
Kenny Loggins “Danger Zone” (1986) Top Gun
Madonna “Live to Tell” (1986) At Close Range
Perhaps the most striking fact about the new star system was that a significant number 
of the superstars—Michael Jackson, Prince, Lionel Richie, Tina Turner, Whitney Houston, 
Billy Ocean, the Pointer Sisters, Janet Jackson, Anita Baker, Stevie Wonder, Kool & the 
g
ang, 
Luther Vandross, and Diana Ross—were African American. This may have been the first in -
dication that the greater cosmopolitanism of a world market could change the complexion of 
popular music at home. 
n
ineteen of the Top Fifty albums of 1985 were by black artists. 
e
ight 
of the twelve most popular hits of 1986 were by African American artists, four of whom were women. As Billboard’s Paul 
g
rein noted in 1986:
Black music has been setting the pace in pop for the past four years, with Michael Jackson, Lionel 
Richie, and Prince & the Revolution leading the way. . . .[I]n 1986 . . . female artists came to 
the forefront. . . .The popularity of black female singers was dramatized in June, when “Whitney Houston,” Patti LaBelle’s “Winner in You” and Janet Jackson’s “Control” held down the top 
three spots on the Top Pop Albums chart. It was the first time that black artists—or female artists, 
for that matter—had ever achieved that monopoly.
38 M USI c V ID e OS , S UP e RSTARS , A n D  Meg A - eV en TS 305During this time, African American producers such as Quincy Jones, n ile Rogers, n arada  
Michael Walden, Jimmy Jam, and Terry Lewis also came to the fore and paved the way for 
L. A. Reid and Babyface 
e
dmonds toward the end of the decade.
Most of the white artists who achieved superstardom during this period were heavily 
influenced by black music. Madonna started as a disco artist and kept abreast of the urban 
dance music scene throughout her career. Phil 
c
ollins had enjoyed a fruitful relationship with 
the 
e
arth, Wind & Fire horn section since his earliest solo hits. 
g
eorge Michael—formerly 
of Wham!—regularly crossed over to the black music market; in 1989, he won the American Music Award for Favorite Soul/R&B Male Vocalist. Bruce Springsteen’s music had r&b roots. Indeed, according to Billboard, the rest of the white rock scene was “in something of a sorry state. Urban/dance-oriented rock sounds seemed to garner the lion’s share of chart success in 1986, with major names such as Robert Palmer, Peter 
g
abriel, and Steve Winwood all leaning 
more toward r&b than rock on their platinum releases.”39
In the 1980s, record companies came to realize that their products’ longevity was the 
key to their financial well-being. If black artists could demonstrate staying power, then black 
artists would become superstars. Second in importance to longevity was breadth of audience. 
The strategy of appealing to as wide an audience as possible led to the release of a number of 
well-calculated cross-racial/cross-ethnic duets in the 1980s.
When Paul Mc
c
artney teamed up with Stevie Wonder in 1982 to 
record “
e
bony and Ivory,” the recording was seen as a breakthrough for 
racial harmony. Mc
c
artney then sang with Michael Jackson on “The 
g
irl Is Mine” in 1982 and “Say, Say, Say” in 1983. This latter recording 
was supported by one of the few interracial videos on MTV , although one had to wade past the trappings of minstrelsy in its staging, costum-ing, and blackface makeup to appreciate its significance. These projects 
can be viewed optimistically as attempts to break down the segregation of the music industry or cynically as two commercial giants cashing in on each other’s superstardom. Julio Iglesias was introduced to the U.S. mainstream through two 1984 duets, one with Willie 
n
elson (“To All the 
g
irls I’ve Loved Before”) to see if he 
might spark the country end of the market and one with Diana Ross (“ All of You”) to test his 
appeal among black listeners. Other cross-racial pairings ranged from pop-oriented commer-cial gambits to socially conscious anthems.
These cross-racial successes encouraged record companies to spread even single acts to 
multiple marketing categories. In 1985, Kool & the 
g
ang released Emergency, which, on the 
strength of three Top Ten singles, remained in the Top Forty for nearly a year. The group fin-
ished the year in the number one position on the black music charts and among the top twenty 
acts on the pop, adult contemporary, and dance charts. Madonna registered on the same four 
charts that same year, topping both the pop and dance categories. Stevie Wonder also found acceptance in these marketing categories when “Part-Time Lover” (1985) reached number one on all four charts during 1985. As a whole, in their attempts to consolidate cross-racial mar-kets, these efforts brought a new dimension to the very term crossover. A few crossover projects seemed to have a higher purpose. “Sisters Are Doin’ It for Themselves” (1985), by 
e
urythmics 
and Aretha Franklin, included a video portraying women in a broad range of leadership roles. Perhaps the most striking fact about 
the new star system was that a signifi-
cant number of the superstars were  
African American. This may have been 
the first indication that the greater  cosmopolitanism of a world market could change the complexion of 
 
popular 
music at home.
306  RO c KI n’ OUTProceeds from the sale of the number one single “That’s What Friends Are For” by Dionne 
Warwick and Friends (
e
lton John, 
g
ladys Knight, and Stevie Wonder) went to finance AIDS 
research. But these efforts had the benefit of hindsight, as they ventured down a trail that  
had been blazed some eight months earlier by the ultimate crossover recording—“We Are  
the World.”
Charity Rock and Mega-Events: Who Is the World?
International superstars and technological wonders like satellite transmission and the portabil-ity of cassettes had, by the mid-1980s, made popular music truly global. Perhaps nothing better illustrates this phenomenon than the string of socially conscious mass concerts and all-star 
performances, known as mega-events, that began in 1985 with Band Aid, Live Aid, and “We 
Are the World.” Because these projects, somewhat cynically dubbed charity rock, also aided transnational record companies in finding new markets, they have sometimes been written off as politically irrelevant. More often than not, however, this judgment is too facile.
While a handful of major corporations have always exercised tight economic control 
over the international music market, acquiring the lion’s share of the market is not synonymous with determining the form, content, style, and impact of popular music. If anything, in their relentless pursuit of higher profits, record companies have tended to relin-
quish artistic control and to move further and further away from 
the creative process. By the beginning of the 1980s, music, to the transnational corporate giants, had become a “bundle of rights” for things like television, movies, and advertising. Focused on these new sources of income, the industry cared little to intervene in musical content except when forced to do so (see 
c
hapter 10).
Thus, in the mid-1980s, popular music tended to develop according to two opposing 
principles that corresponded roughly to the extremes of the commercialism/authenticity continuum. On the commercial end, record companies discovered that their back catalogues were gold to filmmakers and advertisers. Ben 
e
. King’s “Stand by Me” was featured in an 
eponymous film, and Levi’s used it to sell jeans in Britain; as a result, the 1961 r&b classic reentered the British charts and generated brisk sales in the United States as well. 
c
ream’s 
“I Feel Free” was used to sell cars; the Doors’ “Riders on the Storm,” to sell tires. The Beatles’ 
“Revolution” turned up as the soundtrack for a 
n
ike commercial. In the 1990s, even Dylan’s 
“The Times They Are A-
c
hangin’” was used to promote an accounting firm. “What’s new 
about the rock/ad agency tie-in,” said Simon Frith, “is not the exploitation of stars’ sell-ing power as such . . . but the use of anticommercial icons to guarantee the ‘authenticity’ of the product they’re being used to sell.”
40 If commercialism compromised authenticity, it was 
recovered somewhat by the more humanitarian impulse of charity rock. This humanitarian 
bent was colored, according to John Rockwell of the New York Times, by “rock’s leftist bias,” 
which “arose from its origins as music by outsiders” and “was solidified by the 1960s,” when 
it became an anthem of change—“racial with the civil-rights movement, and also social, sexual, and political.”
41
In their relentless pursuit of higher  
profits, record companies have tended 
to relinquish artistic control and to 
move further and further away from  
the creative process.
 M USI c V ID e OS , S UP e RSTARS , A n D  Meg A - eV en TS 307Christmas in Ethiopia: The Advent of Charity Rock
The story of charity rock begins with Bob g eldof, leader of the Boomtown Rats, an Irish punk 
group. Inspired to action by a BB
c
 documentary on 
e
thiopian famine, 
g
eldof, with Midge 
Ure of Ultravox, wrote “Do They Know It’s 
c
hristmas.” He then organized the biggest names 
in British popular music to record the song as Band Aid, with all proceeds donated to famine 
victims. “Do They Know It’s 
c
hristmas” became the biggest selling U.K. single ever, totaling 
7 million copies worldwide. 
g
eldof tried to organize a similar project in the United States but 
was stonewalled by some artists. “Look, they viewed me as a minor pop singer from 
e
ngland,” 
he told Rolling Stone. “From their point of view, it’s like Joe Blow calling up. . . . But if Ken Kragen calls up, they know it’s kosher. They know that Lionel [Richie] and Quincy [Jones] will be there and that you’re gonna have a good show.”
42 This is, of course, exactly what happened.
In the United States, charity rock was organized by Harry Belafonte and Ken Kragen. 
Manager for both Lionel Richie and Kenny Rogers, Kragen covered a broad range of pop ter-
rain with the credibility that 
g
eldof lacked. African Americans provided artistic leadership: 
“We Are the World” was co-written by Michael Jackson and Richie, and produced by Quincy 
Jones, with Jackson as music director. The all-star ensemble that released it was called U.S.A. (United Support of Artists) for Africa—also the name of the organization administering the record’s profits. Kragen served as president of U.S.A. for Africa.HEAR MORE
Bob Geldof on 
Mysearchlab
“We Are the World” brought together a range of artists who might not otherwise have appeared on 
the same stage. In so doing, the project opened the door to bolder undertakings like “Sun City.”
308  RO c KI n’ OUT“We Are the World” was structured around cameo appearances by the biggest names 
in U.S. popular music—Michael Jackson, Lionel Richie, Bruce Springsteen, Kenny Rogers, 
Billy Joel, Madonna, 
c
yndi Lauper, Diana Ross, Huey Lewis, Bob Dylan, Stevie Wonder, Ray 
c
harles, and more. Because it fit promoter Bill 
g
raham’s description of 1980s rock as “the 
voice of corporate America,” it proved to be an easy target for the critics. “With We Are the 
World, I know what they meant,” said Jackson Browne. “But on the other hand, that’s the prob-
lem with 
n
orth America. We think we are the world!”43 When it was released, g reil Marcus 
argued that the song
sounds like a Pepsi jingle—and the constant repetition of “There’s a choice we’re making” con-
flates with Pepsi’s trademarked “The choice of a new generation” . . . and the true result will likely be less that certain Ethiopian individuals will live . . . than that Pepsi will get the catch phrase of its advertising campaign sung for free by Ray Charles, Stevie Wonder, Bruce Springs-
teen, and all the rest.
44
There was also a distasteful element of self-indulgence as performers 
proclaimed their own salvation while singing about an issue they would never experience on behalf of a people most of them would never en-
counter. 
e
ven so, “We Are the World” became for charity rock what “We 
Shall Overcome” was to the civil rights movement and helped to clear 
the way for Live Aid, to date the largest single event in human history.
Live Aid made Marshall McLuhan’s global village something of a reality for at least 
sixteen hours. It was organized as an act of will by 
g
eldof, who conned, cajoled, and even 
resorted to what he called “moral blackmail” to convince more than sixty artists (not to men-
tion promoters, ticket sales agencies, merchandising concerns, sponsors, satellite operators, and radio and television stations) to donate their time and/or money to the cause. The event was organized as a Band Aid project. U.S.A. for Africa did not participate as an organization and 
neither Jackson nor Richie appeared, though the concert closed with an ensemble rendition of “We Are the World.” The concert was staged simultaneously at Wembley Stadium in London and JFK Stadium in Philadelphia on July 13, 1985, and it was broadcast either live via fourteen satellites or pretaped to more than 1.6 billion people in 160 countries.
Although the widely rumored Beatle reunion with Julian Lennon sitting in for John 
never happened, Live Aid had its share of classic rock ‘n’ roll moments. Keith Richards and Ron Wood of the Rolling Stones joined Bob Dylan for an all-star performance of “Blowin’ in the Wind.” Mick Jagger teamed up with Tina Turner for what one newsweekly called a “de-lightfully lascivious” version of “State of Shock.” The Who played together for the first time in three years, and Led Zeppelin and 
c
rosby, Stills, 
n
ash & Young reunions occurred, although 
time and various indulgences had taken their toll. Daryl Hall and John Oates joined former 
Temptations David Ruffin and 
e
ddie Kendricks for some show-stopping choreography. Phil 
c
ollins managed to perform at both Wembley and JFK by zooming across the Atlantic on the 
supersonic 
c
oncorde. 
g
eldof ’s own magic moment occurred when he was hoisted onto the 
shoulders of Paul Mc
c
artney and Pete Townshend on stage for the world to see.
Press accounts celebrated and criticized the concert—celebrated it for “using the power, 
energy and invention of rock & roll to accomplish something of practical social value”45 and “W e Are the World” became for char-
ity rock what “We Shall Overcome” was 
to the civil rights movement and helped 
to clear the way for Live Aid, to date the 
largest single event in human history.
 M USI c V ID e OS , S UP e RSTARS , A n D  Meg A - eV en TS 309criticized it for its paucity of black and Latino artists and its trivialization of the issues. MTV , 
which carried the full sixteen-hour telecast, was the primary target for criticism in the United States because its veejays showed more interest in displaying themselves than in the issues at 
hand or the value of rock history. As the reunited Led Zeppelin launched into their seminal 
“Stairway to Heaven,” the cameras cut to Martha Quinn looking enraptured. The performance of rap group Run-D.M.
c
., one of the few youth-oriented black groups booked for the event, 
was short-shrifted so that MTV could cover Sting’s backstage arrival. Interview questions sel-dom went deeper than “What does Live Aid mean to you?” Hype, glitter, and industry gossip routinely took precedence over education, analysis, and a call to action.
c
omparisons with other rock events abounded, the most obvious being to Woodstock. 
Indeed, Joan Baez opened the Philadelphia show with, “
g
ood morning, you children of the 
1980s. This is your Woodstock and it’s long overdue.” In point of fact, however, Baez’s com-
ments reflected wishful political thinking. Woodstock was the product of a bygone era; it was experienced as participatory, communitarian, and anticommercial. Live Aid was an unabashed celebration of technological possibilities in a period of yuppie conservatism. With its corporate sponsors—AT&T, 
e
astman Kodak, 
c
hevrolet, and Pepsi—it was more a successor to the US 
Festival, organized by Apple computer co-founder Steve Wozniak in 1982 and 1983 as a cel-ebration of music and new technologies with an openly commercial design.
46 Said commentator 
Pete Hamill, “The American Live Aid audience was part of a new American generation that 
thinks Ronald Reagan is a wonderful president, Rambo a wonderful role model, and 
g
renada a 
wonderful war.”47
Still, as Will Straw pointed out, “The most underrated contribution rock musicians can 
make to politics is their money, or ways in which that money might be raised.”48 The actual take 
from Live Aid was $67 million, a staggering amount of money by any fund-raising standard. 
e
ven so, 
g
eldof, who was nominated for the 
n
obel Peace Prize for his efforts, recognized its 
limitations: “I’m aware that a million dollars is a lot of money, but when 130 million people are 
affected by this problem, even $67 million is nothing.”49 The question remained as to what ex-
tent Live Aid had served the cause at hand versus to what extent it had served capital. At the 
1986 ceremony of the British Phonographic Industry’s (BPI) awards, 
n
orman Tebbitt of the 
Thatcher administration “extolled Live Aid as a triumph of international marketing.”50 On this 
side of the Atlantic, John 
c
ostello, vice president of Pepsi, said: “Live Aid demonstrates that 
you can quickly develop marketing events that are good for companies, artists, and the cause.”51
Mega-Events: The Politics of Mass Culture
To many, charity rock was a contradictory phenomenon. It provided activist musicians with a platform for political expression on a previously unthinkable scale while enabling the music industry to exploit a gold mine of untapped markets. Such competing tendencies encouraged 
a new view of mass culture. Far from being considered a cultural wasteland of mindless con-
sumption, many activists now came to see mass culture as “contested terrain”—an ideological cauldron in which new values could be forged.
Band Aid, Live Aid, and U.S.A. for Africa created a climate in which musicians worldwide 
felt compelled to develop African famine relief projects. For a partial list: as 
n
orthern Lights, 310  RO c KI n’ OUTcanada’s top pop stars recorded “Tears Are n ot e nough”; West g ermany’s all-star Band für 
Africa released “
n
ackt im Wind”; as 
c
hanteurs sans Frontières, thirty-six French singers 
offered “
e
thiopie”; Belgium contributed “Leven Zonder Honger”; the 
n
etherlands, “Samen”; 
Australia, “
e
.A.T.” (
e
ast African Tragedy); and fifty African artists, including Youssou 
n
’Dour, 
Hugh Masakela, Manu Dibangu, and King Sunny Ade, recorded “Tam Tam pour L’
e
thiopie.”52 
These efforts created the cultural space for progressively bolder projects, 
including some that targeted issues closer to home. An offhand com-
ment by Bob Dylan about the plight of the family farm, made from the 
stage at Live Aid, prompted Willie 
n
elson, John 
c
ougar Mellencamp, 
and 
n
eil Young to organize Farm Aid two months later. 
n
elson cajoled 
country artists from Kenny Rogers and 
g
len 
c
ampbell to Alabama and 
the 
c
harlie Daniels Band, Merle Haggard and Loretta Lynn, to perform. 
Young and Mellencamp pulled in rockers ranging from Billy Joel, Don Henley, 
e
ddie Van Halen, and Sammy Hagar to X and the Blasters. The 
concert brought together a unique coalition of rock and country artists who were uncommonly respectful of one another, raised $10 million, and became an annual event that has extended 
into the new millennium.
Other, more politicized ventures followed, including Sun 
c
ity, two Amnesty 
 
International 
tours, and two tributes to (South) African 
n
ational 
c
ongress leader 
n
elson Mandela. Using 
“We Are the World” as a model, guitarist Little Steven, from Springsteen’s 
e
 Street Band, as-
sembled more than fifty rock, rap, r&b, jazz, and salsa artists to create the recording “Sun 
c
ity,” 
a politically charged anthem supporting the U
n
-sponsored cultural boycott of South Africa, 
which was then under white minority rule. “Sun 
c
ity” urged musicians not to perform at the 
lavish Las Vegas–like entertainment complex of the same name that was located in one of the so-called South African homelands. Symbolically, it upped the political stakes of all-star record-ings significantly.
As a pop-oriented tune featuring artists that had achieved mainstream acceptance, “We 
Are the World” was the logical extension of the crossover strategy developed in the mid-1980s. Live Aid broadened the politicization of mass culture with heavy metal acts (Judas Priest, Ozzy Osbourne), new wave groups (Simple Minds, the Boomtown Rats), r&b artists (Patti LaBelle, Ashford and Simpson), and rappers like Run-D.M.
c
. “Sun 
c
ity” pushed this process even fur -
ther with a powerful composition and an explicitly anti-apartheid message. It had a wide range of artists—jazz great Miles Davis; salsa stars Ray Baretto and Rubén Blades; rappers Afrika Bambaataa and Run-D.M.
c
.; and two South African groups, the Malopoets and Via Afrika, 
who risked personal reprisals for participating—as well as politically outspoken artists such as 
 
Jackson Browne, Bonnie Raitt, Peter 
g
arrett from Midnight Oil, and Bono from U2. Its video 
masterfully intercut scenes of the horrors of apartheid with cameo appearances of the perform-ing artists. It climaxed with the ensemble cast singing the anthemic chorus at a 
n
ew York 
divestment rally at 
c
itiBank, then segued seamlessly to a demonstration in South Africa with 
black South Africans singing “
n
kosi Sikelel’ iAfrica,” the (unofficial) black South African na-
tional anthem. The creators of “Sun 
c
ity” also encouraged their audience to become informed 
and active on the issue. The album jacket, for example, was filled with information about apart-heid, and a teacher’s guide showed how to use the record and the video in the classroom.charity rock was a contradictory 
phenomenon. It provided activist mu-
sicians with a platform for political 
expression on a previously unthink-
able scale while enabling the music industry to exploit a gold mine of untapped markets.
 M USI c V ID e OS , S UP e RSTARS , A n D  Meg A - eV en TS 311In 1986, U2, then an up-and-coming Irish rock band from Dublin, headlined the 
 c
onspiracy of Hope, a U.S. tour for Amnesty International. As a group of politically progres-
sive, devout 
c
hristians, U2 represented an organization that advocated for prisoners of con-
science around the world. Formed in 1977, U2 first cracked the U.S. Top Forty in 1983 with 
War, which included the poignant political commentary, “Sunday Bloody Sunday.” The first 
of several collaborations with producer Brian 
e
no, The Unforgettable Fire (1984) began their 
ascent to superstardom. Bono’s performance of the album track “Bad” at Live Aid was a par-
ticular star-making turn, highlighted by pulling a young woman from the crowd who was reportedly on the verge of suffocation. By 1987, U2 were the hottest rock act in the world. The Joshua Tree, released that year, went to number one and charted in the Top Forty for more than a year, winning the 1987 
g
rammy Award for album of the year.
Jack Healy, then executive director of Amnesty International USA, organized the 
 c
onspiracy of Hope Tour and engineered the connection between rock and the human rights 
movement. One of the tour’s goals was to recruit new “freedom writers” to participate in 
 
Amnesty’s letter-writing campaigns on behalf of prisoners of conscience. The tour targeted 
six political prisoners, three of whom were freed within two years as a result. In addition, 
 
Amnesty/USA added some 200,000 volunteers to the organization. “Previous to 1986, we were an organization post forty,” said Healy. “Music allowed us to change the very nature of our membership.”
53 In 1988, Healy organized a world tour, the Human Rights n ow! Tour, featuring 
Bruce Springsteen, Sting, Peter 
g
abriel, Tracy 
c
hapman, and Youssou 
n
’Dour as headliners 
supported by acts from host countries. Sting, who had left the Police in the mid-1980s, was 
 
riding high from the successes of The Dream of the Blue Turtles (1985) and . . . Nothing Like the 
Sun (1987). 
g
abriel’s So (1986), the best-selling album of his solo career, had catapulted him to 
international superstardom, and he was already well respected as the prime mover of 
 
WOMAD, 
the international World of Music, Arts, and Dance Festival. 
c
hapman’s self-titled debut album 
hit number one in 1988, enabling Healy to add some diversity (musical and otherwise) to the 
U2 began their rock career as 
 politically committed Christians from Ireland. By the late 1980s, they had 
also become one of the biggest rock 
acts in the world.
312  RO c KI n’ OUTbill. n ’Dour was Senegal’s most popular artist and a master of the African funk, rock, and jazz 
fusions becoming popular internationally. Springsteen was Amnesty’s best-selling artist, but 
the tour had as big an effect on him as he had on it. As Healy recalled:
I remember Bruce Springsteen saying that he’d played to his first black audiences on the Human 
Rights Now! Tour in Zimbabwe and the Ivory Coast. We played to Shintos in Japan, Hindus in India, uptight Orthodox Christians in Greece, a mix of religions in Zimbabwe and a lot of Mus-
lims in the Ivory Coast. And Bruce was loved by all of them; he rocked the stadiums everywhere.
54
After the tour, Amnesty boasted 420,000 members worldwide, with an average age of twenty.
Two massive international concerts were staged at Wembley Stadium on behalf of 
n
elson Mandela, the first on June 11, 1988, to celebrate his seventieth birthday—while 
he was still imprisoned in South Africa; and the second on April 16, 1990, to celebrate his 
release two months earlier. The eleven-hour birthday tribute featured a remarkably diverse roster of first-rate talent
55 and was broadcast to an estimated 600 million people in more  
than sixty countries. In calling for the release of Mandela, the leader of the African 
 n
ational 
c
ongress (A
nc
)—an organization considered illegal by most countries broadcasting the 
concert—the tribute raised the political stakes for mega-events once again. The stage was adorned by a thirty-foot scrim of Mandela’s image perched tastefully atop the slo-gans 
 
“Isolate apartheid” and “The struggle is my life.” The massive speaker columns were 
flanked by exact replicas of the late Keith Haring’s “Free South Africa” poster. Just as “Sun 
c
ity” urged artists and fans to move 
from charity to action, the Mandela shows also broadened the political scope of tours, asking audiences to help bring structural change to South Africa.
The first Mandela tribute had to balance the need to recruit 
stars who could ensure the event’s financial success with the need to present artists committed 
to the cause at hand. As a result, artists like Billy Bragg and South Africa’s Johnny 
c
legg were 
passed over for Whitney Houston and others—for which the event’s organizers were roundly 
criticized. However, Houston was one of the first artists to commit to the festival and her overwhelming popularity helped make the event attractive to broadcasters all over the world. Moreover, she was a favorite of the imprisoned A
nc
 leaders. Ahmed Kathrada, an A
nc
 rebel 
serving a life sentence with Mandela, sent a message that was distributed by the local Anti-
Apartheid Movement and quoted in Rolling Stone: “You lucky guys. What I wouldn’t give just 
to listen to Whitney Houston! I must have told you that she has long been mine and Walter’s [Sisulu] top favorite. . . . In our love and admiration for Whitney we are prepared to be second to none!”
56
Organizers of the second concert, “ An International Tribute for a Free South Africa,” 
had only fifty-four days to produce the event. Still, they assembled an impressive lineup of art-
ists including Peter 
g
abriel, Tracy 
c
hapman, Bonnie Raitt, Anita Baker, 
n
eil Young, 
n
atalie 
c
ole, and Lou Reed. The 72,000 tickets sold out faster than any other event in the history of 
Wembley Stadium. Of course, the real headliner was 
n
elson Mandela. His presence made the 
concert irresistible to broadcasters from some sixty-three countries worldwide. 
e
ven South 
Africa proposed to carry the show, a proposal eventually rejected by the A
nc
 in support of Just as “Sun City” urged artists and fans to 
move from charity to action, the 
 
Mandela 
shows also broadened the political scope 
of tours, asking audiences to help bring 
structural change to South Africa.
 M USI c V ID e OS , S UP e RSTARS , A n D  Meg A - eV en TS 313the cultural boycott of that country. Thus, it was all the more shocking that not one U.S. 
broadcaster would air the event. The only 
n
orth American broadcaster was MuchMusic, 
c
anada’s equivalent of MTV .
Mandela, with his dignified but forceful demeanor and steadfast refusal to compromise his 
principles, drove home his anti-apartheid message to hundreds of millions of people through-
out the world. He indicated his understanding of the power of mega-events when, backstage, he thanked the performing artists for their efforts:
Over the years in prison I have tried to follow the developments in progressive music. . . . Your 
contribution has given us tremendous inspiration. . . . Your message can reach quarters not neces-sarily interested in politics, so that the message can go further than we politicians can push it. . . . We admire you. We respect you, and above all, we love you.
57
environmental concerns were also on the international political agenda in the late 
1980s. 
e
arly in 1989, 
g
effen Records and cable music channel VH-1 promoted a project for 
 g
reenpeace, an international environmental group. As its contribution, VH-1 produced over 
two dozen minute-long spots with celebrities discussing environmental issues. Artists from 
U2 and the Talking Heads to John 
c
ougar Mellencamp and Belinda 
c
arlisle donated twenty-
seven hit songs to an album, Rainbow Warriors, released as Breakthrough in the former Soviet 
Union. It became the top-selling record in that country, with all proceeds split between 
g
reen-
peace and the Soviet Foundation for Survival and Development of Humanity. Our 
c
ommon 
Future, another environmental extravaganza, was staged at Lincoln 
c
enter in 1989, featuring 
Bob 
g
eldof, Sting, Midnight Oil, Herbie Hancock, and actor Richard 
g
ere, as well as scientists 
and world leaders who voiced their concerns over global environmental decline. Among the 
latter, Margaret Thatcher’s taped message about Britain’s fears for the environment proved 
an unnerving sign of the show’s compromised politics, as did the sponsorship by multinational corporations, including Sony, Panasonic, and Honda.
Dave Marsh has been particularly critical of corporate involvement in mega-events, 
claiming that it robs “charity-rock of one of its most important selling points: the selfless-ness of its motivation.”
58 given the scale of mega-events, however, most would be impossible 
without some kind of corporate sponsorship. Amnesty’s Human Rights 
n
ow! Tour would have 
gone bankrupt had not Reebok bailed it out. The mega-events of the 1980s developed a mo -
mentum that obliged corporations and world leaders to accommodate initiatives that were es-
sentially humanitarian or progressive.
Indeed, this momentum affected the culture of popular music in general. As Simon Frith 
and John Street have noted, “The paradox of Live Aid was that while in the name of ‘humanity’ it seemed to depoliticise famine, in the same terms, in the name of ‘humanity’ it politicised mass music.”
59 Mellencamp’s “Rain on the Scarecrow,” about the despair of modern rural life, was 
connected to his involvement in Farm Aid. Jackson Browne’s interest in 
c
entral America led 
to “Lives in the Balance,” a moving criticism of U.S. intervention in 
c
entral America. Likewise, 
there was a resonance between Sting’s participation with Amnesty International and his “They 
Dance Alone,” about the widows of “disappeared” political activists in 
c
hile. With “Luka” 
(1987), singer/songwriter Suzanne Vega highlighted the issue of child abuse. A number of 
rap groups, including Public 
e
nemy, Boogie Down Productions, and Stetsasonic, participated 314  RO c KI n’ OUTin “Self-Destruction,” the anthem of the Stop the Violence movement, which protests black-
on-black crime. For Spike Lee’s film Do the Right Thing, Public 
e
nemy contributed “Fight the 
Power,” the soundtrack for the most powerful statement about racism in the 1980s. By the end 
of the 1980s, there was scarcely a social issue that was not associated in a highly visible way 
with popular music and musicians.
The 1980s mega-events also had an unintended but progressive side effect on the music 
industry itself. Because these performances included a broad range of artists, the outlets that carried the performances helped undermine the segregationist logic of the industry’s tradi-tional formats, which were fragmented by class, race, age, and ethnicity. “Whoever buys [‘Sun 
c
ity’],” remarked coproducer Arthur Baker, “is going to be turned on 
to a new form of music, just as whoever sees the video is going to be turned on to an artist they’ve never seen before.”
60 For a brief time 
in the 1980s, the internationalization of the music industry became 
a two-way process, albeit a limited one. While Anglo-American mu-
sic was disproportionately broadcast to a worldwide audience, artists 
like Youssou 
n
’Dour and Sly and Robbie did gain greater access to 
the world market. It was more than a coincidence that the emergence 
of world music (also known as world beat) in developed countries paralleled the development of charity rock. A greater awareness of world cultures, in turn, influenced the character of mainstream popular music at home. Jackson Browne incorporated 
c
entral American sounds on 
Lives in the Balance (1986); David Byrne of the Talking Heads explored Afro-Brazilian music on Rei Momo  (1989). Perhaps the best-known—and most controversial—fusion of mainstream 
popular music and international music styles was Paul Simon’s Graceland, in many ways a 
pivotal album of the 1980s.
Released in 1986, Graceland was based primarily on South African musical styles and 
incorporated an incredible diversity of cultural influences, ranging, in the words of ethnomusi-
cologist Steven Feld, from
[q]uirky 1960’s Long Island/Brill Building Simon lyrics, pedal steel guitar riffs from a 
 
Nigerian Jùjú band player via Nashville recordings, vocals from Senegalese Youssou N’Dour 
on break from recording projects with British pop star Peter Gabriel, and everything else from Synclavier samplers and drum machines to the Everly Brothers and Linda Ronstadt . . . with exemplars of zydeco . . . and East Los Angeles Chicano rock and roll. . . .
61
Taken as a defining contribution to that amorphous category of world music or world beat, 
Graceland has been at the heart of highly politicized discussions concerning musical appropria-tion and ownership on the one hand and cultural imperialism on the other. Making the album, 
Simon offered three times union scale for sessions and gave appropriate co-writer credits on 
collaborative songs. He was respectful of South African music and worked with notable black South African artists like Ladysmith Black Mambazo and other first-rate studio musicians. The album also featured performances by Los Lobos and zydeco legend Rockin’ Dopsie. The result was a hauntingly beautiful compilation that effectively linked South African rhythms with a range of regional ethnic U.S. influences.It was more than a coincidence that the 
emergence of world music (also known 
as world beat) in developed countries 
paralleled the development of charity 
rock. A greater awareness of world cul-tures, in turn, influenced the character of mainstream popular music at home.
 M USI c V ID e OS , S UP e RSTARS , A n D  Meg A - eV en TS 315Still, as critics noted, most of the album was recorded in South Africa in violation of the 
U
n
 cultural boycott. (This may explain why Simon appeared on “We Are the World” but re-
fused to participate in the more radical Sun 
c
ity project, which directly supported the cultural 
boycott.) Using Linda Ronstadt, who had performed at Sun 
c
ity, as a backup vocalist, Simon 
added to the insult of his own violation of the cultural ban. If his purpose was to showcase 
black South African music, one had to wonder why he named the album after the estate of 
e
lvis 
Presley, a white American who had captured the rock ‘n’ roll crown by employing (some would say imitating) African American musical styles. Simon was also criticized for registering the producer’s credit and all the copyrights in his own name, which ensured him any music awards as well as the lion’s share of subsequent royalties. He was likewise vulnerable to the charge that his songs avoided political content. Under considerable international pressure, he added explicitly anti-apartheid performers such as Miriam Makeba and Hugh Masakela to his 1987 
g
raceland Tour.
Because Simon considered himself anti-apartheid (he recorded in South Africa but did 
not perform there), he and many others tended to dismiss the criticisms. He felt vindicated 
after receiving both the 1986 
g
rammy Award for Album of the Year and the 1987 producer’s 
g
rammy for Record of the Year. Accordingly, Graceland was celebrated, according to Feld, as 
“a melding of mainstream ‘world’ pop and African ‘folk’ musics; the major anti-apartheid con-sciousness-raising and publicity event of 1987; and a major international market breakthrough for the South African musicians.”
62 Five years later, however, on the eve of Simon’s 1992 South 
African tour—the first by a major U.S. artist after cultural sanctions were lifted—the offices 
of the promoter and sound company were bombed by the Azanian 
n
ational Liberation Army. 
While the tour was supported not only by the white minority government but also by two of 
South Africa’s main black organizations (the A
nc
 and the Inkatha Freedom Party), many in 
South Africa felt that lifting sanctions was premature and that Simon was an appropriate target because of the Graceland controversy. In the international community, Graceland produced pas-
sionate responses on both sides of the political divide, reinforcing the notion of mass culture as Applying his ability as a singer/songwriter and 
fine ear for multicultural sounds, Paul Simon created one of the most celebrated and criti-
cized albums of the 1980s. He is pictured 
with Ladysmith Black Mambazo, who were among the featured South 
 
African artists to 
appear on Graceland.
316  RO c KI n’ OUTcontested terrain. Scholar g eorge Lipsitz put the matter well: “Did [Simon] depoliticize and 
decontextualize the music of oppressed people while celebrating his own openness? 
c
ertainly 
not intentionally. . . . But . . . he remains so preoccupied with what cross-cultural contact means 
for him, that he neglects addressing what it might mean to others.”63
Mega-events themselves faded from view in the early 1990s, coinciding with the disin-
tegration of the Soviet Union and the establishment of global capitalism as a single world-
wide economic system. They did not reappear until opposition to this new economic order had 
reached mass-movement proportions. But by then, the contradictions involved in negotiating 
music’s dual role as cultural force and commercial product had become all but unmanageable. In 2005, the twentieth anniversary of Live Aid, Bob 
g
eldof organized Live 8, an eleven-
concert global extravaganza, designed to “make poverty history” by pressuring the world’s 
richest countries, known as the 
g
8, to pledge increased aid and greater debt relief for Africa.64 
Two years later, Al 
g
ore spearheaded Live 
e
arth to spread his “inconvenient truths” about the 
environment to a global audience through 24 hours of concerts on seven continents. 
Just as Live 
e
arth issued a “call to action,” Live 8 promoted itself as a movement-building 
exercise, announcing on its website: “We don’t want your money. 
We want you.” But rather than adopt the oppositional politics of the antiglobalization movement, Live 8 organizers chose to negoti-ate with the 
g
8, leaving a trail of broken promises and reducing the  
audience to consumers of the event rather than developing their  
potential as political activists. As of this writing, neither campaign had significant concrete accomplishments to point to, although such events do provide an opportunity to keep critical issues in the public eye.
By the mid-1980s, the music industry had bounced back from the doldrums of worldwide reces-
sion and had resumed its pattern of more or less steady growth now tied to international sales. If Michael Jackson’s Thriller represented the revitalization of the music industry as an interna-tional cultural force, Paul Simon’s 
g
raceland embodied all the contradictions involved in trying 
to manage the unequal distribution of cultural power. Technological advances had brought the cultures of the world closer together, and while these developments created possibilities for musi-cal expression that were new and exciting, they also allowed the music industry to centralize its operations. In attempting to use the power of popular music to foster greater understanding and empathy among different cultures, mega-events politicized popular music while providing the music industry with access to new international markets. In both instances, they generated consid-erable controversy. During this period in the United States, new developments in rap and heavy metal became the focus of controversy. By the late 1980s, rap and metal had become the defining elements of a new disaffected youth culture and precipitated the most concerted attempt to regulate popular music since rock ‘n’ roll’s payola hearings.
HEAR  M ORE 
Chapter Questions on 
MySearchLabBut rather than adopt the  oppositional 
politics of the antiglobalization move-
ment, Live 8 organizers chose to 
 
negotiate with the G8, leaving a trail 
of broken promises and reducing the audience to consumers of the event rather than developing their potential 
as 
 
political activists.
  317
10
In the mid-1980s, a powerful convergence of forces   
took place in popular music. Aided significantly by technological ad-
vances, mega-events politicized popular music to a greater extent than 
at any time since the 1960s. At the same time, MTV—itself a product 
of new technology—renewed its focus on youth culture. As in the 1960s, a connection 
emerged among youth, music, and politics that soon became most apparent in the phenomenal expansion of rap and heavy metal. At this cultural moment, the Parents Music Resource Center (PMRC), a Washington-based pressure group, launched its campaign against explicit lyrics in popular music. The music industry found itself embroiled in a battle over the values and principles that would guide the country into the next decade and perhaps the next 
century. The PMRC initially targeted heavy metal; as rap gained in prominence, however, it became the focal point of conservative wrath.
Technology, of course, has been a central factor in forging links among youth and their 
music and politics. Just about all successful popular recording artists make use of technological 
 
advances, but rap and metal artists, more than others, have incorporated these advances into the very essence of their music. Both styles have also sought to upend the underlying logic of the im-provements. While the history of sound recording can be read as a quest to eliminate noise, both rap and metal have used “cleaner” technology precisely to achieve a “dirtier” sound. Metal has used it in the service of volume and distortion; rap, in the organization of its disparate sonic elements.
Given metal’s preoccupation with power, it has always relied greatly on technology. The 
heavily distorted guitar sound—the most obvious sign of heavy metal power—occurs when an 
amplifier is overdriven (driven beyond its capacity to deliver a clean sound). The 1960s and 1970s 
saw significant innovations in amplifier design by companies like Marshall, who built amps of LEARN MORE
Learning Objectives 
on MySearchLabRap and Metal:  
The Voices of  
Youth Culture
As in the 1960s, a connection emerged 
among youth, music, and politics that 
soon became most apparent in the 
phenomenal expansion of rap and heavy 
metal.
318  R o C kin’ ou Tunprecedented power that also had built-in distortion effects. Also proliferating in these years was 
a range of new devices called “stompboxes” (for the way they were turned on and off by stepping on them) that gave guitarists the capacity to electronically alter their sound in all manner of ways.
1 
Jimi Hendrix made creative use of these new technological possibilities in the 1960s, adding such stompbox effects as the wah-wah, phaser, 
o
ctavia, and fuzz box to his powerful amp set-up. 
i
n the 
1970s and 1980s, Eddie Van Halen used a voltage regulator to increase power to his amp, generat-
ing his fabled “brown sound,” an intensely overdriven sound that retained a rich, warm tone.
i
n the case of rap, DJs transformed dual turntable rigs into full-fledged musical instru-
ments and boom boxes became localized radio stations, often to the dismay of nearby listen-ers. 
i
n the mid-1980s, rap artists began to use samplers (digital devices capable of recording, 
storing, and reproducing any sound in nature perfectly) and drum machines to construct the basic building blocks of a rap composition: the rumbling bass tones that can destroy car radio speakers, familiar beats looped into endless repetition, found sounds and prerecorded tracks reshuffled into an original sound collage.
o
ne aspect of rap that is analogous to power in heavy metal is the concept of noise. As 
rap has strayed further and further from middle-class conventions, it has come to be defined 
less by melody and harmony and more by the notion of organized sound or noise. 
i
n titling her 
seminal analysis of rap Black Noise, Tricia Rose used the noun to explicate not only rap’s rela-tionship to technology but also a new development in the history of black orality and a cultural device for political resistance.
2 Public Enemy’s “Bring the n oise,” for example, assaults the 
listener with a dense mix of samples and synthesized noise. Borrowing from the gospel call-
and-response style, Chuck D’s vocal exhortation “Turn it up!” is answered by DJ Terminator 
X with furious record scratching (back cueing a record with the sound system turned on). As a 
whole, then, “Bring the 
n
oise” mounts a defiant challenge to mainstream listeners through its 
intentionally aggravating use of noise.
Both rap and heavy metal have used the power of noise to assault traditional musical con-
ventions and to trace the boundaries of youth culture. 
i
n doing so, they have provided highly 
visible targets for the self-proclaimed custodians of good taste. At the same time, both genres have their defenders. Reflexive dismissals of metal’s racism and misogyny—common during its first wave—have tended to give way to more complex rereadings of the music in some 
people’s efforts to understand the youth culture of the 1980s and 1990s. Similarly, issues of violence and misogyny in rap have become part of a dialogue about class, age, and gender differences within the 
black community and the relationship of black youth to mainstream culture. As a result, both genres have become arenas for what can be viewed as a battle for American values.
The Continuing History of Heavy Metal
After its initial surge in the early 1970s, heavy metal seemed destined to be a short-lived phe-
nomenon. Disco redirected musical tastes in one direction, punk and new wave in another. By the late 1970s, two leading 
u
.S. rock magazines—Circus and Creem—wondered if heavy 
Both rap and heavy metal have used 
the power of noise to assault traditional 
musical conventions and to trace the 
boundaries of youth culture. In doing so, 
they have provided highly visible targets for the self-proclaimed custodians of good taste.
 RAP  A n D  META l  319metal was on its last legs. i n 1978, Circus asked, “Will Heavy Metal Survive the Seventies?”3 
A year later, Creem followed suit, pondering “
i
s Heavy Metal Dead?”4 leading 1970s artists 
like Aerosmith, Deep Purple, and Black Sabbath had either broken up or experienced crippling 
personnel shifts by decade’s end. By the turn of the 1980s, however, a resurgence of the music 
transformed it into the dominant expression of youth culture in the 1980s.
Heavy Metal: The New Wave
key to the metal revival were the groups that Geoff Barton of the British music weekly 
Sounds dubbed and promoted as “the new wave of British heavy metal” (or 
n
W
o
BHM). These 
groups—
i
ron Maiden, Def 
l
eppard, Saxon, Venom, Raven, Angel Witch, Diamond Head, 
Tygers of Pan Tang, and more—arose as heavy metal’s answer to the vitality of British punk 
and new wave. Their emergence was foreshadowed by two key predecessors: Judas Priest, who made a string of classic metal albums (Sad Wings of Destiny, 1976; Sin After Sin, 1977; Stained Class , 1978) in the midst of punk’s ascent; and Motörhead, whose promotion of a nascent form 
of metal/punk crossover on Motörhead (1977) and Bomber and Overkill (both 1979) set a prec-
edent for others to follow.
5 Also coming ahead of metal’s new wave was AC/DC, an Australian 
band that found its greatest success in England and then in the 
u
nited States. Formed in 1974 
around the nucleus of brothers Angus and Malcolm Young on guitars and Bon Scott on lead 
vocals, AC/DC was briefly classified as part of England’s punk scene before metal’s resurgence 
took hold. The band broke into the 
u
.S. Top Forty with Highway to Hell  (1979) just before 
Scott died from the effects of alcoholism. With Brian Johnson as his replacement, AC/DC’s momentum continued with three Top Ten albums in a row, including Back in Black (1980), which became one of the ten best-selling albums of all time, with over 22 million 
u
.S. copies 
sold as of 2012.
Among the younger bands of British metal’s new wave, Def 
l
eppard and 
i
ron Maiden 
found the greatest worldwide success. Def 
l
eppard shared AC/DC’s management and eventu-
ally inherited their producer, Robert “Mutt” 
l
ange. Their debut album, On Through the Night  
(1980), established them as part of Britain’s new wave, but also brought charges that they were 
trying to sell out to the 
u
.S. audience with the album track, “Hello America.”6 undeterred, 
and aided by MTV , Def 
l
eppard’s High ‘n’ Dry (1981) broke into the 
u
.S. Top Forty. 
i
ron 
Maiden first gained notoriety playing at DJ 
n
eal 
k
ay’s heavy metal soundhouse, which led 
to their inclusion on 
k
ay’s influential compilation, Metal for Muthas (1980). Sporting a rough, 
prog rock-meets-punk sound on their first two albums, they did not hit the 
u
.S. Top Forty 
until 1982, when Bruce Dickinson replaced singer Paul Dianno for The Number of the Beast, an 
album whose title appealed to a fascination with the occult that was largely absent from the 
band’s material.
n
o particular brand of metal dominated the British new wave. Motörhead prefigured 
speed metal on tracks like “
o
verkill” and “ Ace of Spades,” joined in this tendency by less 
prominent bands such as Raven and Venom . 
i
ron Maiden, eclectic in its references and musi -
cal moods, played more traditional heavy metal with musical precision and an expansive ap-
proach to songwriting; pegged by The Number of the Beast as a Satanist group, they used occult imagery as one of several sources to explore morality, power, and chaos. “Run for the Hills” HEAR MORE
Heavy Metal on 
MySearchLab320  R o C kin’ ou Taddressed the plight of n ative Americans; “Stranger in a Strange l and” and “Sea of Madness” 
spoke to the alienation of youth. Def 
l
eppard leaned more squarely toward the pop side of 
metal. 
o
n High ‘n’ Dry, producer Mutt 
l
ange played up the music’s melodic elements, a direc-
tion the group would further pursue on the blockbuster hits Pyromania (1983) and Hysteria  
(1987), and that was described somewhat disparagingly by Philip Bashe as “metal pop” and by 
Deena Weinstein as “lite metal.”7
Even with such variation, certain elements united these new wave groups under the 
heavy metal banner. “What all the new bands did share,” Weinstein has written, “was a general 
heavy metal sensibility, along with youthfulness and a strong emphasis on visual elements.”8 
According to Robert Walser, “[T]he new wave of metal featured shorter, catchier songs, more sophisticated production techniques, and higher technical standards.”
9 in the u nited States, 
Van Halen embodied these characteristics. Throughout the 1980s, the group turned out noth-
ing but Top Ten platinum albums; 1984, on the charts for over a year, yielded the number one 
single “Jump.” 
u
ntil the mid-1980s, lead singer David 
l
ee Roth provided a striking visual fo-
cus with his macho aerobic performances; his replacement, Sammy Hagar, brought a more ver-
satile voice that allowed the band to combine its usual high-energy tunes with power ballads 
Iron Maiden helped define the new wave of British heavy metal and became one of the most  
influential bands in the genre. RAP  A n D  META l  321that kept them near the top of the charts for the next decade. All along, lead guitarist Eddie 
Van Halen continued to set the standard for technical virtuosity. 
k
nown for his general speed 
and precision, Van Halen also made pioneering use of the technique of two-handed tapping, 
through which he tapped the index finger of his right hand onto the fretboard along with the 
hammer-ons and pull-offs fingered by his left to play very fast, two-part, widely spaced, cascad-ing, classical-style solos at screeching volume.
Bearing Van Halen’s influence, the new virtuosity he helped to shape grew substantially 
in the 1980s. Extending the marks of classical music that had been part of metal since its early years, Randy Rhoads brought his highly refined technique to 
o
zzy 
o
sbourne’s band for 
two albums—Blizzard of Ozz (1980) and Diary of a Madman (1981)—before dying in a plane crash in 1982. Even more openly indebted to classical music was Sweden’s Yngwie Malmsteen, who listed Bach and Paganini among his main influences and released a debut album, Rising 
Force, that consisted almost entirely of instrumental tracks that showcased his virtuosic at-tack. 
o
ther rising virtuoso guitarists of the time such as Steve Vai and Joe Satriani were less 
indebted to classical music, but similarly produced predominantly instrumental music that dis-played a sort of virtuosic dexterity rarely found among rock guitarists of decades past. As the 1980s proceeded, such fine-tuned, flamboyant guitar playing would attract a new designation: shred, named for the way guitarists were prone to “tear up” the fretboard with their extreme technique.
10
of course, virtuosity in heavy metal—indeed, in the context of Western music gener-
ally—as Walser has astutely pointed out, “has always been concerned with demonstrating and 
enacting a particular kind of power and freedom that might be called ‘potency.’ Both words 
carry gendered meanings, of course; heavy metal shares with most other Western music a 
patriarchal context wherein power itself is construed as essentially male.”
11 Thus, as it had been in the 1970s, heavy metal remained the 
near-exclusive province of (young, white) males. At metal concerts, 
women were accepted as subcultural equals only when they con-
formed to the masculine codes of dress (jeans and black 
 
T-shirts) 
and evidenced the proper knowledge and love of the music. Women 
in “feminine” garb were usually regarded as groupies, on hand to service the band sexually. Gradually, though, a smattering of fe-male artists began to appear within the genre, spurred by 
n
W
o
BHM, which gave rise to two 
all-female bands, Girlschool and Rock Goddess. Girlschool in particular achieved some respect and chart position in Britain after touring with Motörhead; 
u
.S. success, however, never came 
their way.
The next wave of metal arrived from 
l
os Angeles. Groups like Mötley Crüe and Ratt 
tended toward a glam rock appearance, harkening back to the 
n
ew York Dolls, and a more 
pop-friendly metal sound. Mötley Crüe’s debut, Too Fast for Love (1981), led the way. 
i
nitially 
released on the band’s own 
l
eathür record label, it spurred enough attention to get the band 
a deal with Elektra. After touring with 
k
iss in 1983, their first Elektra release, Shout at the 
Devil, made it into the Top Twenty. Ratt first hit the Top Ten with Out of the Cellar  in 1984. 
o
ther 
l
.A. groups included Quiet Riot, Dokken, and W .A.S.P . Quiet Riot scored two hit sin-
gles—“Cum on Feel the 
n
oize” and “Bang Your Head (Metal Health)” from their Metal Health  At metal concerts, women were ac-
cepted as subcultural equals only when 
they conformed to the masculine codes 
of dress (jeans and black T-shirts) and 
evidenced the proper knowledge and love of the music.
One of the most famous synthesizer intros in the history of rock ‘n’ roll 
begins this classic 1984 hit by Van Halen. While Van Halen was known 
as a heavy metal band, this song is a quintessential pop hit in terms of 
its structure, its unforgettable hook, the power of the rhythm section, 
the rocking guitar solo, and the joyous and infectious refrain. Synthesiz-ers, invented in the 1950s but only widely employed in rock beginning in the 1970s, had become associated with some of the most pretentious 
excesses of art rockers, as well as the often sterile and sometimes anti-
septic dance beats of 1980s new wave and disco. Eddie Van Halen was the 
first musician since Pete Townsend (who had practically reinvented the rock 
synthesizer with his definitive parts on Who’s Next?) to understand that synths could rock, that (plugged into a Marshall 
amp and turned up to 10) they could deliver just as much visceral power as a Les Paul guitar.
Musical Style Notes
Eddie Van Halen’s signature virtuoso guitar style featured a technique known as two-handed tapping, exploiting the heavily 
amplified electric guitar’s sensitivity and response. In his speed, imagination, ability to construct totally memorable guitar riffs, fantastic command of guitar tones, and telepathic communication with drummer/brother Alex, Eddie was unquestion-
ably the most influential hard-rock guitarist of the late 1970s and early 1980s. Although his guitar on “Jump” plays a 
secondary role to the synthesizer through most of the track, his solo showcases his characteristic musicianship, mixing blues-based scales and bends with artificial harmonics, a finger-tapped passage in the solo’s mid-section, and a climactic set of rapidly picked lines.
Like so many great pop hits, “Jump” opens with a first iteration of the fantastic hook, a simple, synth-driven chord 
progression that recurs as a refrain throughout the tune. Though the band was widely criticized for having “gone soft” be-cause the A section features synth instead of heavy guitar, the simple, repetitive, major-key straightforward synth chords provide a wonderful contrast to the B section and to the minor-key guitar solo.
In the B section, you can also hear the bass playing a syncopated rhythm. A syncopation happens when one plays 
between the main beats or when two instruments play in different rhythmic units against each other. Here, for example, the bass temporarily counts in six, and the rest of the group counts in four. The bass then transitions at the end of the 
line to get back “in sync” with everyone else. Here is that relationship written out in a chart:
Count in 4 1 + 2 + 3+4+ 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 1
Can’t you see me stand- ing here Igot my back against the rec- ord ma- chine
Bass notes: / / / / / / / /
Count in 6 1 2 3 4 5612 3 4 5 6(1 2 3 4) 1
The players in this version of Van Halen were Eddie Van Halen, guitar, keyboards, Oberheim OB-XA synthesizer, 
and background vocals; Alex Van Halen, drums; Michael Anthony, bass and background vocals; and David Lee Roth, lead 
vocal.“ “Jump”
Artist:
 
Van Halen
Music/Lyrics by Van Halen
Label:
 
Warner Brothers,  
from the LP 1984  (1984)Listening Guide 28
322  R o C kin’ ou TListening Guide 28Musical “Road Map” 
Timings Commen T s
0:00–0:14 Introduction: fat-sounding synth bass note, over which we 
hear the repeated chord progression that constitutes the 
famous “Jump” riff.
This is punctuated with drum kicks and a scream by singer 
David Lee Roth.
0:14–0:28 Rhythm track is layered over synthesizer riff.
0:28–0:59 Verse 1, section A
Two sections, 8 bars each
0:59–1:15 B section; new melody and lyricsListen to syncopation in bass at beginning (see Musical 
Style Notes above).
1:15–1:30 Chorus
1:30– Verse 2
(only 8 bars—half as long as Verse 1)
1:45 B section returns.
2:01 Chorus
Roth yells “JUMP!”—which cues guitar solo.
2:17 Eddie Van Halen’s guitar solo
2:31 Solo focus switches to synthesizer (also played by Eddie 
Van Halen).
3:05 Reprise of synth introduction riff
3:19 Chorus (repeats until fade).
3:35 Chorus repeats, fade to end.
 RAP  A n D  META l  323324  R o C kin’ ou Talbum (1983)—rare for a metal band at the time. Dokken—including the melodious vocals of 
Don Dokken and the fiery guitar playing of George 
l
ynch—developed a characteristic mix of 
power ballads and up-tempo metal on releases like Tooth and Nail (1984) and Back for the Attack 
(1987), the latter of which made the Top Twenty. W .A.S.P . never had a major hit in the 
u
nited 
States despite a diehard following. The group’s importance was blown out of all proportion 
when right-wing critics of heavy metal discovered “ Animal (F**k 
l
ike a Beast),” a song dis-
turbing to many in its celebration of the sheer physicality of sex.
The 
l
os Angeles metal scene was given a boost by the 1983 
u
S Festival, organized by 
Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak. Taking heed of the audience fragmentation that had occurred since the 1960s, Wozniak organized the event around different genres on different days. The heavy metal day—with 
o
zzy 
o
sbourne and Judas Priest from Britain; Scorpions from Germany; 
Triumph from Canada; and Van Halen, Quiet Riot, and Mötley Crüe from 
l
os Angeles—drew 
the largest crowd, estimated by some reports to have numbered over 300,000. Given that the cor-
responding day devoted to new wave (featuring the Clash, Men at Work, and others) drew less than half that, Mötley Crüe singer Vince 
n
eil triumphantly (if hyperbolically) proclaimed, “
i
t was 
the day that new wave died and rock and roll took over….[
i
]t seemed as if the scene on Sunset 
Strip on Friday and Saturday nights had suddenly been transported to a field in the middle of nowhere on a sweltering hot spring afternoon.”
12 The resulting publicity prompted other metal 
acts, including Poison and Guns 
n
’ Roses, to relocate to 
l
.A. Poison, in particular, was well suited 
to the glam look and the lighter sound that characterized much of the 
l
.A. scene. The group’s 
carefully tended, artfully moussed, blow-dried hair led it, along with Ratt and the lesser-known 
White 
l
ion, to be dubbed “hair” bands. Female artists like 
l
ita Ford and Vixen emerged from 
that scene, too, and achieved a measure of metal fame in the late 1980s.
Crucial to the growth of metal, particularly the 
l
.A. variety, was its MTV exposure. The 
genre had been largely excluded from radio since its beginnings. While some album-oriented rock (A
o
R) stations programmed metal in the late 1970s, they cut back on it significantly in 
the early 1980s during ratings wars with other formats. Even fledgling MTV was reluctant to air heavy metal. During its second period, however, MTV “programmed heavy metal with a vengeance.”
13 Among its more prominent metal groups were Mötley Crüe, Quiet Riot, Dokken, 
Twisted Sister, and Scorpions. According to Andrew Goodwin,
as MTV expanded from the main urban centers of the United States on the coasts into midwestern 
cities and towns, it needed to reach out with music that appealed to the rockist tastes of its new demographics. Furthermore, the network was no longer dependent on a relatively small number of clips originating in Europe. These factors colluded to generate MTV’s embrace of heavy metal 
music.
14
Heavy metal’s MTV success led to its increased programming on radio. The real payoff, 
of course, was in sales. Billboard reported that the music’s market share jumped after a year of 
heavy play on MTV from about 8 percent in 1983 to 20 percent in 1984.15
Metal’s advance slowed temporarily in 1985 when right-wing Christian fundamental-
ist groups and various conservative civic, professional, and watchdog organizations pressured MTV into cutting back on its metal programming. MTV tried to justify its acquiescence by 
claiming that it had cut back to focus on more cutting-edge product, but according to 
l
inda  RAP  A n D  META l  325Martin and k erry Segrave, “[A]s most of the industry saw it…MTV was bowing to the pres-
sure of various conservative watchdog groups who had been complaining.”16 This campaign 
had immediate results: Metal’s market share dropped to 15 percent in the first quarter of 
1985.17 Yet metal had developed an irrepressible momentum, and continued demand prompted 
MTV to create a weekly all-metal program, Headbangers’ Ball, at the end of 1986 that placed some of its more objectionable videos in an after-hours slot. Headbangers’ Ball  had 1.3 million 
viewers each week, becoming MTV’s most popular show.
For a music defined, in part, by transgression, increased acceptance into the mainstream 
of 
u
.S. popular culture was a mixed blessing. Although heavy metal bands had long enjoyed 
 
robust record sales, the metal subculture treated its outsider status like a badge of honor. 
 
Before 
mass acceptance, hit singles were unnecessary: early metal was an album-oriented genre, with 
long songs that often emphasized instrumental solos over vocal hooks. But mainstream rec-ognition brought pressure for a more polished (commercial) sound. Thus, metal’s expansion beyond its original subcultural following paralleled its fragmentation.
Metal Fragments
over the course of the 1980s, the heavy metal press became rife with distinctions among cat-
egories. Traditional or classic heavy metal was used to describe the original sound of wildly dis-
torted guitar, heavy bass and drums, and raw, unadorned vocals. Lite or pop metal emphasized 
sweeter vocals, even harmony. Glam metal was defined by a particular look. Thrash and speed 
metal featured faster tempos derived from punk. Death metal, a subcategory of speed/thrash, focused on violence, brutality, and gore. Black metal focused on Satanic or occult-based themes, with white metal its Christian (and generally disparaged) counterpart. For all these distinctions, 
however, there were really only two camps. At one end of the spectrum was lite metal and at the other were the groups lumped together as speed/thrash metal.
l
ite metal groups like Def 
l
eppard, Quiet Riot, Van Halen, Mötley Crüe, and Bon 
Jovi were favored by MTV , gained greater access to radio, and expanded into stadium-size 
 
venues. 
l
ite metal initially transformed the metal audience from subculture to mass culture 
and 
 
altered its gender balance.18 A number of lite metal albums signaled the transition. Def 
l
eppard’s 
 
Pyromania (1983) reached number two at a time when Michael Jackson’s Thriller was 
entrenched at the number one position and remained on the charts for over a year. The album’s 
three hit singles generated album sales of 7 million units, a sure sign that metal was mov-
ing beyond subculture status. Quiet Riot’s Metal Health and Van Halen’s 1984 made similarly 
 
impressive showings, peaking at numbers one and two respectively.
These albums also marked the period when the MTV performance clips came into fre-
quent use. This was, according to Goodwin, “a direct result of the need for heavy metal acts to establish an ‘authentic’ (i.e., documentary rather than fictional) set of images and to display musical competence.”
19 According to E. Ann k aplan, these clips were typical of the “nihilist 
heavy metal video,” in which
the male body is deliberately set up as object of desire: zoom shots pick up male crotches and bare 
chests in an erotic manner and instruments are presented as unabashed phallic props….[T]hese 
videos…adopt a challenging, aggressive stance toward the fans and spectators….20326  R o C kin’ ou TWhile k aplan aptly describes metal’s preoccupation with reinforcing an unstable and in-
secure masculinity, she acknowledges that “a more complicated set of discourses” was involved. 
David 
l
ee Roth, who was let go as Van Halen’s lead singer shortly 
after “Jump” became the group’s most popular single, argued that “a 
lot of what 
i
 do can be construed as feminine. My face, or the way 
i
 
dance, or the way 
i
 dress myself for stage.”21 The lure of androgyny 
as a transgressive social practice was strong in metal, particularly 
among glam metal groups. 
i
t complicated metal’s masculinist codes 
and, in conferring prestige on traditionally female signs, may have 
accounted for some of metal’s positive appeal among young women.
Some metal artists adopted romance as a topic in the mid-1980s, also clearly extending 
metal’s appeal to women. Before this, themes of romantic love had been strongly subordinate to statements of male lust for women (as with 
l
ed Zeppelin’s “Whole 
l
otta 
l
ove”)—or women 
had been excluded entirely from the content of metal songs, a strategy that Robert Walser has termed “exscription.” Bands seeking to appeal to a wider pop audience, though, began to “soften” metal with romantic material, a trend that Walser claimed to have “drawn legions of female fans to metal.”
22 The pivotal album in this regard was Bon Jovi’s Slippery When Wet  
(1986).
Formed in 
n
ew Jersey in the early 1980s, Bon Jovi initially sported many characteristics 
of the standard heavy metal band—doom and gloom lyrics, macho performances, a leather/mascara look, and the powerhouse sound of distorted guitar. For Slippery When Wet (1986), however, Bon Jovi traded in their leathers and makeup for the more casual bluejean look of rock authenticity. 
l
ead singer Jon Bon Jovi had the good looks of a male movie star, and in the 
band’s romantic material projected a degree of vulnerability rare among heavy metal artists. Put together, these new elements had enormous appeal for female fans; Slippery When Wet be-came one of the decade’s best-selling albums. 
i
t rose to number one on the charts and stayed The lure of androgyny as a transgres-
sive social practice was strong in metal, 
particularly among glam metal groups. 
It complicated metal’s masculinist 
codes and, in conferring prestige on traditionally female signs, may have accounted for some of metal’s positive 
appeal among young women.
Lead guitarist Eddie Van Halen’s technical 
virtuosity, coupled with singer David Lee Roth’s over the top stage persona,  
propelled Van Halen to international  
stardom in the early 1980s. RAP  A n D  META l  327in the Top Forty for well over a year, generating 
two number one hit singles, including “
l
ivin’ on 
a Prayer,” a classic love-conquers-all composition. 
Walser convincingly captured the band’s success-
ful mix of metal and pop elements, observing, “The sustained and intense sounds of heavy metal are channeled behind the romantic sincerity of pop, while smooth, sometimes poignant synthe-sizer sounds mediate the raw crunch of distorted guitar.”
23
Against this backdrop of upbeat, forward-looking pop metal, speed or thrash metal (two 
largely interchangeable terms) absorbed punk and hardcore influences to generate a different 
sort of metal hybrid less accessible to mainstream audiences. Metal scholar Deena Weinstein 
interprets speed metal as “a fundamentalist return to the standards of the heavy metal subcul -
ture.”24 Yet the authenticity of these new metal subgenres came not from their purity but from 
their blend of metal virtuosity with the speed, anger, and intensity of hardcore punk. More-
over, most of the early speed/thrash bands—Metallica, Slayer, Exodus, Megadeth, Testament, 
Possessed, and Anthrax—came out of underground club scenes in 
n
orthern and Southern 
California and 
n
ew York, and made their first recordings for independent labels such as Metal 
Blade and Megaforce that were akin to punk labels in their D
i
Y spirit.25 By the mid-1980s, the 
cross-fertilization of metal and punk was such that another new subgenre arose called “cross-
over” (alternately labeled “speedcore” or “thrashcore”), which included bands such as D.R.
i
., 
S.
o
.D., and Suicidal Tendencies. Crowds at metal shows began “moshing”—an updated form of 
slam dancing—in emulation of their hardcore counterparts, and some segments of the metal 
audience assumed a defiantly anticommercial stance.
For speed/thrash enthusiasts, Slayer would emerge as the ultimate underground metal 
band. 
i
f speed metal was fast, Slayer played with nearly unparalleled rapidity, driven by the 
riveting double-bass drum approach of drummer Dave 
l
ombardo. The band’s guitarists, Jeff 
Hanneman and 
k
erry 
k
ing, issued dissonant solos that largely avoided the precisely played 
scales of their shred counterparts. Vocalist Tom Araya sang with a blood-curdling, high-pitched wail perfectly suited to the band’s lyrics, which moved from an early emphasis on 
 
Satanic imagery to more vivid and disturbing portrayals of violence. Reign in Blood (1986) set 
a standard for extremity that would influence bands for years to come, and managed to achieve 
Jon Bon Jovi, leader of the group that bears his surname, started 
out as a leather-clad rocker who then drew legions of female fans to heavy metal with themes of romance and his vulnerable 
good looks.328  R o C kin’ ou T
Listening Guide 29Musical Style Notes
Music Terminology Demystified: What Is a Riff?
A riff is a repetitive musical phrase characterized by a memorable melody 
and a compelling rhythmic pattern. It can be used as an introduction or as 
a steady pattern that repeats throughout a piece. Three classic but quite 
different examples can be found in the Beatles’ song “Birthday” from the 
White Album, the two-bar riff that permeates Run-D.M.C.’s tune “Rock Box,” 
and the memorable guitar riff Duane Allman wrote for Derek and the Domi-
noes’ song “Layla.” In the case of heavy metal, a song’s signature riff often 
features a driving rhythm and considerable speed and energy, like the signature riff in Metallica’s “. . . And Justice for All.”
Writer Richard Gehr has described Metallica’s music as “mini-epics of ear-shattering volume and mind-boggling 
speed.” These “epics” are actually created by assembling sections of music based on instrumental riffs. James Hetfield has stated that the members of Metallica regularly create musical riffs, which they often write down or record for future use, partnering song lyrics with instrumental riffs that seem to fit the mood, and adding additional riffs and patterns that correspond with the changing content or mood of the different lyric sections. This creative method works well to produce these musical mini-epics, with their multiple contrasting sections, just as classical composers crafted melodic themes 
that would then be manipulated and reiterated in different sections of large-scale musical compositions.
Musical “Road Map” 
Timings Commen T s
0:00–0:22 Introduction: electric guitar
0:22–0:28 Second guitar added.
0:28–0:34 Drums and bass enter.
0:34–0:39 Drums out—guitars continue.
0:39–0:45 Drums and bass re-enter.
0:45–0:56 Introduction form repeated with all instruments.
0:56–1:01 Transition section, characterized by percussive texture 
and full stops.
1:07–1:21 Introduction ends—the actual song form begins here, 
with the steady speed metal percussion style, marked by occasional syncopations (accents placed between the beats).
1:21–1:41 The song’s signature riff begins here.
(Note the use of syncopations and sophisticated and 
complex rhythms.)
1:41–2:11 Another guitar is layered into the sound texture.
2:11–2:31 Verse 1, A section of melody
2:31–2:55 Verse 1, B section of melody
2:55–3:16 Chorus“. . . And Justice for All”
Artist:
 
Metallica
Music/Lyrics by James Hetfield, 
Lars Ulrich, and Kirk Hammett
Label:
 
Elektra, from the LP  
…And Justice for All  (1988) RAP  A n D  META l  329
Listening Guide 29Timings Commen T s
3:16–3:37 Signature riff returns.
3:37–3:58 Verse 2, A section
3:58–4:21 Verse 2, B section
4:21–4:53 Chorus
4:53–5:05 Return of percussive transition section heard at 0:56.
5:05–5:29 Guitar solo, part 1
5:29–5:55 Guitar solo, part 2
5:55–6:22 Tempo begins to slow down.
6:22–7:27 Beginning of new instrumental section, with slower 
tempo, repeating melody, and descending chord pat-tern (the bass notes of the chords move progressively lower in pitch).
7:27–7:47 Signature riff returns.
7:47–8:09 Verse 3, A section
8:09–8:33 Verse 3, B section (same lyrics in each verse)
8:33–8:54 Chorus
8:54–9:07 Riff continues, with additional guitar sound layered in.
9:07–9:41 Final section—repeat of the last section of the chorus, followed by the repetition of the signature riff leading to the end off the song.
9:41–9:43 Ending tag—guitar plays alone, followed by three per-cussive chords.330  R o C kin’ ou Tgold record sales despite  being 
rejected by the band’s label, 
CBS, for objectionable content 
(it would ultimately be issued by 
producer Rick Rubin’s American label).
i
f Slayer embodied the uncompromising spirit of the 1980s metal underground, 
 
Metallica 
became the best-known and best-selling speed metal group. Formed in 
l
os Angeles in the early 
1980s and influenced by 
l
.A. hardcore and 
n
W
o
BHM bands such as Motörhead and Venom, 
Metallica quickly relocated to San Francisco where the local metal scene was more amenable to their sound. Kill ’Em All (1983), the band’s debut, was released by 
n
ew York independent label 
Megaforce and was unfiltered thrash metal. By their second album, Ride the Lightning (1984), 
the band was diversifying its sound, most notably on “Fade to Black,” which built from a sub-dued, almost ballad-like set of opening verses to a dramatic, distortion-filled climax.
26 Master 
of Puppets (1986) became the first platinum-selling speed/thrash album, suggesting significant 
and expected potential for mainstream acceptance.
At the time, most fans and critics felt that Metallica remained loyal to the subculture, and 
their next full-length album,…And Justice for All (1988)—featuring new bassist Jason 
n
ewsted, 
who joined after Cliff Burton died in a bus accident while on tour—achieved Top Ten status 
and platinum sales with almost no radio play. However, with Metallica (1991), the band alien -
ated many old fans as it picked up millions of new ones. 
i
t would be the best-selling album 
of the group’s career and their first to go to number one, but Metallica drew accusations that the band had tempered its intensity and simplified its song structures to gain new listeners, charges that would follow the band throughout the 1990s and to the present.
27
By the late 1980s, metal’s popularity had exceeded all expectations. After Bon Jovi’s 
Slippery When Wet became the most popular record of 1987, Billboard reported, “[f]ive more 
metal bands cracked the top five: Cinderella, Poison, Whitesnake, Mötley Crüe, and Def 
 l
eppard. At one point in June, five of the top six albums were by metal-leaning acts.”28 These 
were the 
o
sbourne/Rhoads Tribute 
l
P; Mötley Crüe’s Girls, Girls, Girls; Poison’s Look What 
the Cat Dragged In; Bon Jovi’s Slippery When Wet; and Whitesnake’s self-titled 
l
P. 
i
n 1988, 
Like most heavy metal groups, Metallica en-
joys an intimate relationship with power and technology. What is rare is that they have 
been able to achieve official artistic recogni-
tion and overwhelming commercial success without losing subcultural credibility. RAP  A n D  META l  331metal accounted for eleven of the fifty best-selling albums of the year, and in 1989 ten of the 
top forty most popular albums were metal. Such success brought new recognition from the 
n
ational Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences (
n
ARAS), which established a Grammy 
Award for Best Hard Rock/Metal Performance in 1988. When Jethro Tull beat out Metallica 
for the award—despite the latter’s sizzling performance of “
o
ne” at the awards telecast—it 
appeared that the conservative elements of 
n
ARAS would rule. When 
n
ARAS separated 
hard rock from heavy metal the following year, however, Metallica (and metal) finally got their due.
Bridging the gap between metal’s pop and thrash elements was Guns 
n
’ Roses, a new 
l
.A. group. Appetite for Destruction (1987),  their Top Forty debut, rose to number one and 
charted for seventy-eight weeks, generating three Top Ten singles. Guns 
n
’ Roses quickly 
became the new bad boys of heavy metal. Rising from the 
l
.A. street scene, they wrote and 
played with raw emotion that resonated with many alienated young whites—and others. As 
Rolling Stone put it, “You didn’t have to be a runaway to relate to the feelings of dislocation, ter-ror and excitement that mingled in the likes of ‘Paradise City’ or ‘Welcome to the Jungle.’”
29 At 
the same time, on “
o
ne in a Million” (from G N’ R Lies, 1988) the group fueled (and exploited) 
some fans’ racial/sexual fears, insecurities, and hostilities when lead singer Axl Rose spoke of 
African Americans and homosexuals as “niggers” and “faggots.” The group incurred the wrath 
of the more progressive elements of the rock critical establishment, but their popularity con-tinued unabated into the next decade. Use Your Illusion I and Use Your Illusion II both finished among the twenty most popular albums of 1992.
By the end of the 1980s, metal had become so expansive that there was even space for a 
handful of African American and female artists. Most prominent among the former was 
 l
iving 
Colour, led musically and spiritually by guitar virtuoso Vernon Reid. Reid was a founder of 
n
ew York’s Black Rock Coalition, whose express purpose was to reclaim rock ‘n’ roll’s black 
roots. 
l
iving Colour was the perfect articulation of the organization’s position. Reid and his 
group drew on every major movement in black music—from blues and jazz to hip hop, from 
Jimi Hendrix and Sly Stone to James Brown and George Clinton—to fashion their brand of metal. 
l
iving Colour first hit the Top Ten with Vivid in 1989; they finished 1989 just a bit be-
low Guns 
n
’ Roses on the year-end pop charts and received the Hard Rock Grammy for “Cult 
of Personality.”
l
iving Colour’s success made the absence of other African Americans more conspicu-
ous, especially because until recently most heavy metal musicians had found their way into the genre through the blues and Hendrix. Sound Barrier, an all-black metal band from 
l
.A., was 
the only true counterpart to 
l
iving Colour and enjoyed far less exposure. From Thin 
l
izzy in 
the 1970s to 
k
ing’s X in the 1980s, even racially mixed groups could be counted on one hand. 
Historians of the genre have tried to explain this absence in various ways. Walser has pointed 
to metal’s history as a British working-class style, while Weinstein has pointed to black “cul-
tural self-segregation.”30 Weinstein’s argument contradicts the founding principle of l iving 
Colour and does not account for why the group had so much difficulty getting signed to a label 
or marketed.
i
n assessing the significance of racism in heavy metal, one must wonder how much 
the anti-disco campaigns of hard rock radio stations in the late 1970s served to widen the 332  R o C kin’ ou Talready existing racial divide. The growing emphasis upon classical music as a resource for 
metal guitarists also accented the gulf between metal musicians and African American musi-cal styles. 
l
ike punk, metal appeared progressively less concerned with rock’s black roots, 
and was taking shape as an expression of “whiteness” that existed in a more culturally iso-
lated state—perhaps as a reflection of the segregated suburban settings in which the music found its broadest constituency. Still, it is important to note that, except for isolated ex-amples such as Guns 
n
’ Roses’ “
o
ne in a Million,” explicitly racist themes seldom showed up 
in the music’s content.31
For female artists, the road to metal success, even at the height of metal mania, was 
almost impassable. While the explosion of lite metal helped create more gender-balanced 
audiences, it opened few doors for female performers. Heart had a run of 
l
Ps that reached 
numbers one, two, and three, respectively, and scored with a number of singles, beginning 
with “What About 
l
ove” (1985), that approached the sound of a power ballad. Joan Jett and 
the Blackhearts also hit the Top Twenty in 1988 with Up Your Alley, but the inclusion of either act in heavy metal would be hotly contested among most fans. 
o
nly two female acts 
who achieved national recognition were incontrovertibly metal—
l
ita Ford and Vixen. Ford 
had performed with Joan Jett as a member of the Runaways in the mid-1970s. She released her first solo album, Out for Blood, in 1983, but did not garner national attention until she changed labels (to RCA) and managers (to Sharon 
o
sbourne, wife of 
o
zzy). Lita (1988) 
brought her into the Top Thirty, and its hit single, “Close My Eyes Forever,” co-written 
Living Colour, whose express purpose was to reclaim the black roots of rock, was one of the 
few black metal bands to gain significant notoriety. RAP  A n D  META l  333with o zzy o sbourne, entered the Top Ten. When Ford said 
in a Metal  interview, “
i
 wear my balls on my chest,” she spoke 
volumes about the contradictory demands placed on a female 
performer in a masculinist subculture.32 Vixen worked as an un-
signed performing ensemble for years before landing a contract 
with EM
i
. The group’s eponymous debut album, released in 1987, was among the most 
popular albums of 1989, eventually selling over 1 million copies.
By 1990, metal bands had glutted the market and metal sales slumped. 
i
n particular, the 
most commercially oriented, pop metal bands lost listeners and credibility as hard rock became 
dominated by grunge and alternative music. Metallica’s continued—and indeed 
 
growing—
success showed that thrash metal, once seen as the antidote to metal’s pop crossover, had be-
come its best commercial hope. 
u
nderground subgenres like death and black metal flourished 
in these years away from the spotlight, and formed the basis for an extreme metal scene that became truly international in scope.
33 Meanwhile, in the u nited States, black pop now domi -
nated the charts, and rap had begun to push metal aside as the cutting-edge statement of youth 
culture.
Hip Hop, Don’t Stop
Rap music must be understood historically as one cultural element within a larger social move-ment known as hip hop, which also includes break dancing and, to some extent, graffiti art. The movement was nothing short of a new way of life. As Tim Carr has noted:
Hip Hop is to funk what bebop was to jazz…a new strain of an old form, stripped down and 
revved up, rejuvenated. The Young Turks challenging the old masters. Just as bebop replaced stiff collared swing orchestras with Zoot-suited combos…so has hip hop emerged as a musical style 
with a brand new way of walking, talking, dancing, and seeing the world.
34
Hip hop, with roots in the gang cultures and ghetto communities of the South Bronx and 
Harlem, originated at the same time as disco but developed for more than five years in almost 
complete isolation. Rap historian Jeff Chang summarized the social conditions that gave rise to 
rap: “[T]he South Bronx had lost 600,000 manufacturing jobs….By the mid-seventies, average 
per capita income dropped to $2,430, just half of the 
n
ew York City average and 40 percent of 
the nationwide average. The official youth unemployment rate hit 60 percent….
i
f blues culture 
had developed under the conditions of oppressive, forced labor, hip-hop culture would arise from the conditions of no work.”
35
Old School Rap
The early culture heroes of hip hop, like those of disco, were the DJs.  Following the norms 
of gang culture, certain DJs dominated particular geographical territories. As early as 1973, 
pioneer Bronx DJs such as 
k
ool Herc, soon followed by Afrika Bambaataa and Grandmaster 
Flash, had already begun to distinguish themselves from their disco counterparts by including 
When Ford said in a m etal interview, “I 
wear my balls on my chest,” she spoke 
volumes about the contradictory de-
mands placed on a female performer in 
a masculinist subculture.
334  R o C kin’ ou Thard-core funk such as Jimmy Castor’s “ i t’s Just Begun,” the i ncredible Bongo Band’s “ Apache,” 
and James Brown’s “Get on the Good Foot,” and developing new ways of handling records. 
k
ool Herc, for example, played only a record’s hottest, most percussive portion, known as the 
break. The resulting sustained dance beat peaks came to be called break-beats, and the young 
b-boys and b-girls who danced to them came to be known as break dancers. Meanwhile, on the West Coast, the 
o
riginal 
l
ockers, a dance troupe, introduced the robotic movements known as 
popping and locking that would rejuvenate hip hop dancing in the 1980s.
Hip hop DJs tried to outdo each other by spinning outrageous combinations of records. 
o
ne of Afrika Bambaataa’s sets, for example, might include the theme from the Pink Panther, 
the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, Grand Funk Railroad, 
k
raftwerk, and the Monkees in addition 
to James Brown, Sly and the Family Stone, and the Jackson Five. “Hip hop,” noted David Toop, 
“was the new music by virtue of its finding a way to absorb all other music.”36
By 1976, DJs had transformed records and turntables from mere sound carriers into 
full-fledged rhythm instruments, using a device called a cross-fader to be able to connect two 
turntables together and control the sound coming from each one independently. Here the true 
technical pioneer was Grandmaster Flash, who broke with the DJ conventions of the time by 
placing his hands onto the surface of the records he spun and marking the spots on the vinyl discs where a particular break-beat started or ended so as to better manipulate the transition between one record and another. Flash later outlined what he called his formula for cutting between records, which consisted of four elements:
1.
 
Flip the fader as soon as the end marker hits the needle.
2.
 
Wind the other record back while the first one played.
3.
 
Wait for the break to finish.
4.
 
BAM! Throw the fader on turntable number one and start all over again.37
As their popularity increased, the best Bronx-style DJs outgrew small house parties and 
moved into clubs, community centers, and finally into auditoriums, some of which could accom-
modate up to 3,000 people. 
i
n these larger venues, DJs began to use crew members as emcees 
(MCs) to provide vocal entertainment as a means of crowd control. 
l
ike break dancing, MCing, 
as it was first known, started as a solo art. MCs soon developed their unique styles, eventually 
known as rapping. Among the first solo MCs were Eddie Cheeba, DJ Hollywood, and later 
k
urtis 
Blow. Grandmaster Flash expanded the idea to include whole groups of MCs. Soon rap groups 
were popping up all over the Bronx and Harlem, using names like Double Trouble, the Treach-
erous Three, the Funky Four Plus 
o
ne, and the 
Furious Five (started by Flash). Afrika Bambaataa worked with several rap groups, including the Jazzy Five, the Cosmic Force, and the Soulsonic Force.  
By around 1978, MCs had begun to surpass DJs in 
cultural importance.
Although the style of early rap groups 
evolved spontaneously, rap’s roots can be traced through Caribbean island traditions back to West African griots. 
i
n the 
u
nited States, rap’s ancestors HEAR MORE
Hip Hop on 
MySearchLab
Out of his love of music and his experiences 
as a South Bronx gang member and a follower of the Black Panthers, Afrika Bambaataa, a 
pioneer hip hop DJ and leader of the Soulsonic 
Force, fashioned the Zulu Nation as an inclu-sive hip hop posse.
 RAP  A n D  META l  335include field hollers, work and prison songs, competitive urban word games like signifying 
and the dozens, scat singing, the rhymes of Muhammad Ali, the politically potent verse of the Watts Prophets and the 
l
ast Poets, and finally the lyrics of artists such as James Brown 
and Gil Scott-Heron. The hip hop movement followed an African American progression, but a 
strong 
l
atino presence also existed. African American DJs incorporated 
l
atin music into their 
mixes, just as Puerto Rican DJ Charlie Chase (of the Cold Crush Brothers) played funk. 
o
ther 
notable Puerto Rican DJs and MCs included Whipper Whip and Rubie Dee (Fantastic Five), and 
o
.C. and Devastating Tito (Fearless Four). The most famous of the break-dance crews, the 
Rock Steady Crew, was predominantly Puerto Rican.38
Bronx-style rapping, around since 1976, was not recorded commercially until 1979. Be -
fore that, rapping existed only in live performance or on homemade cassettes. 
i
t is surpris-
ing, therefore, that the first rap records did not come from that neighborhood. “
k
ing Tim 
iii
 
(Personality Jock)” was recorded by the Fatback Band from Brooklyn, and “Rapper’s Delight” was made by the Sugar Hill Gang, named for the Sugar Hill re-cord label in 
n
ew Jersey. Sugar Hill Records was largely run by 
Sylvia Robinson, a record industry veteran who, as a teenaged 
singer with the duo Mickey and Sylvia, had an early rock ‘n’ roll hit with “
l
ove 
i
s Strange” (1956). She later became what Dan 
Charnas called perhaps “ American pop music’s first female record producer.”
39 “Rapper’s Delight,” which used classic hip hop rhymes 
recorded over the disco hit “Good Times” by Chic (redone by a 
skilled set of studio musicians), was made by a trio of rappers that 
Robinson and her son Joey assembled strictly for the purposes of making a record to exploit 
the new rap craze as it was just beginning to hit. 
i
t made the lower reaches of the pop Top 
Forty, eventually selling some 2 million copies, and for a while, Sugar Hill became the leading independent rap record label in the 
u
.S., until it was undone by its own bad business practices.
l
ike most early rap, “Rapper’s Delight” was good time music, meant to capture an exu-
berant party-like spirit. Given its lineage, though, it was inevitable that rap would include topi-cal themes. The first recorded rap to deliver a serious message was “How We Gonna Make the Black 
n
ation Rise” (1980) by Brother D and Collective Effort. The style and political priorities 
of message rap was anticipated by two earlier albums: 
l
ightnin’ Rod’s (a.k.a. Jalal 
n
uridin) 
Hustler’s Convention, on which a former 
l
ast Poet recited powerful prison poetry over tracks 
by members of 
k
ool and the Gang; and Rappin’ Black in a White World, by the Watts Prophets. 
By the late 1960s, both the Poets and the Prophets had become targets of the FB
i
’s infamous 
C
oin
TE
l
PR
o
 operation and neither received their artistic or commercial due at the time. 
Two decades later, samples of their work could be found on albums by hip hop artists such as 
Def Jeff, Too Short, Tim Dogg, and A Tribe Called Quest.
Due to the phenomenal success of “Rapper’s Delight,” hip hop was “discovered” by the 
music business, the print media, and the film industry in turn, and Bronx DJs entered the downtown 
n
ew York club scene. Afrika Bambaataa proceeded to spin at the Mudd Club, 
the Ritz, the Peppermint 
l
ounge, 
n
egril, Danceteria, and the Roxy, where he hosted crowds 
of up to 4,000 people. Films like Wild Style,  Flashdance,  Breakin’, and Beat Street soon followed, 
bringing hip hop to a mass audience. Whereas the low budget Wild Style provided a unique, By 1976, DJs had transformed records 
and turntables from mere sound carri-
ers into full-fledged rhythm instruments, 
using a device called a cross-fader to be 
able to connect two turntables together and control the sound coming from each one independently.
336  R o C kin’ ou Tup-close portrait of hip hop culture still in its formative stages, films like Flashdance exhibited 
the common mass media tendency to rip cultural phenomena from their historical contexts. Similar disjunctures were evident on vinyl. The first so-called rap record to reach pop num-
ber one was Blondie’s “Rapture” (1981). That same year, Chris Frantz and Tina Weymouth of 
Talking Heads formed Tom Tom Club and recorded “Wordy Rappinghood,” followed by the hip hop–influenced “Genius of 
l
ove.” While respectful of hip hop culture, these were still out-
siders reaping the rewards of early rap.
Some of the most enduring Bronx-based rap records were also produced during this 
time. Afrika Bambaataa and the Soulsonic Force’s “Planet Rock” (1982) borrowed its melody from 
k
raftwerk’s “Trans Europe Express,” while employing a Roland TR 808 drum machine 
and rhymes that were, according to Steven Hager, “a dreamy, utopian throwback to the 1960s” to create a formidable dance floor and retail hit.
40 Also released in 1982, Grandmaster Flash 
and the Furious Five’s “The Message” heralded greater lyric sophistication and a tilt toward 
topical themes, as soon seen in “Problems of the World” by the Fearless Four and “White 
l
ines 
(Don’t Do 
i
t)” by Grand Master Melle Mel and the Furious Five.
i
n the early 1980s, the never-ending debate on whether rap 
would continue began. 
i
n the final analysis, these debates were ir-
relevant. Hip hop had already influenced cultural forms from ballet 
and modern dance to fashion design and studio art, not to men-tion pop, rock, funk, soul, and jazz. The evidence could be found in Herbie Hancock’s use of DJ Grandmaster D.ST on the Grammy-winning “Rockit,” and Grandmaster Melle Mel’s rapid-fire rap in-troduction to Chaka 
k
han’s “
i
 Feel for You,” which hit the Top Ten 
in 1984.
Hip Hop: The Next Generation
By the mid-1980s, a second generation of n ew York rap artists had sprung up,  including 
 Whodini, the Force MDs, the Fat Boys, and Run-D.M.C, and a fledgling hip hop scene was 
 
developing in 
l
os Angeles. A mobile 
l
.A. DJ crew called 
u
ncle Jam’s Army (after the 
 Funkadelic album Uncle Jam Wants You) played music at 
l
.A. street parties, while clubs served 
the downtown crowd. Prominent among the local DJs were Dr. Dre and Yella from the World 
Class Wrecking Cru, which eventually metamorphosed into 
n
.W .A. (
n
iggas With Attitude). 
Also on the West Coast scene were the hard rapping 
i
ce-T and 
k
id Frost, hip hop’s first 
 
Chicano nationalist, both of whom initially played to predominantly Chicano audiences. 
i
n 
1984, station 
k
DAY made a significant commitment to hip hop when, through the efforts of 
its program director, Greg Mack, all the popular 
n
ew York groups performed in 
l
os Angeles.
The growth of 
n
ew York hip hop moved rap from the twelve-inch single (the industry 
standard for dance music since disco) to the album. 
k
ey to this transition was the success 
of Run-D.M.C. (1984), the first gold rap album. The group that gave its name to the album 
represented a departure from first-generation rappers in a number of ways. Joseph Simmons 
(Run), Darryl McDaniels (D.M.C.), and Jason Mizell (Jam Master Jay), all college educated, came from the lower-middle-class neighborhood of Hollis, in Queens. Run-D.M.C. had their In the early 1980s, the never-ending de-
bate on whether rap would continue be-
gan. In the final analysis, these debates 
were irrelevant. Hip hop had already 
influenced cultural forms from ballet and modern dance to fashion design and studio art, not to mention pop, rock, 
funk, soul, and jazz.
 RAP  A n D  META l  337sights set on conquering both the rock and 
rap markets. “Rock Box” from their debut and the title track to the follow-up, King of Rock, 
featured the Hendrix-like live guitar of 
 
Eddie 
 Martinez on top of the hard-hitting beats 
mixed by Jam Master Jay. While hip hop DJs had always used rock tracks in their mixes, Run-D.M.C.’s use of live guitar was novel. Martinez was a bridge to rock and a reminder of the 
l
atino presence in hip hop—a presence 
further emphasized in the 
l
P’s use of mixes 
by Tony Torrez and the 
l
atin Rascals.
Run-D.M.C.’s first two albums were released by Profile, one of several independent la-
bels that entered the rap game in the aftermath of the success of “Rapper’s Delight.” Another 
of those labels, Def Jam, would grow to supplant Sugar Hill as the key rap label of its day. Def Jam was formed through a unique interracial partnership between Russell Simmons—a young black entrepreneur whose Rush Management company promoted and managed a variety of rap acts (including Run-D.M.C., which included his brother Joseph)—and Rick Rubin, a white, Jewish 
n
.Y .
u
. student and punk musician who became drawn into the city’s growing hip hop 
scene.41 Finding their first significant success with the Queens-based rapper ll  Cool J, Def 
Jam would release records by many leading rap artists from the mid-1980s forward, and the 
shared sensibilities of Simmons and Rubin would play a major role in fostering rap’s move 
 
toward crossover success on a large scale—even for music that wasn’t released on Def Jam.
Run-D.M.C.’s album Raising Hell (1986), for example—which went to number three on 
the charts and sold 3.5 million copies—was again put out by Profile, but was produced by 
Rubin (and the group continued to be managed by Simmons). For the album, Rubin suggested remaking Aerosmith’s “Walk This Way” (1975), one of Jam Master Jay’s favorite rock selec -
tions, as a duet between Run-D.M.C. and Aerosmith’s Steven Tyler and Joe Perry, who were just returning to music after an extended bout with drugs and alcohol. The song’s video is a metaphor for the contradictions inherent in crossing over. 
i
t opens with the two groups per -
forming on opposite sides of a wall. 
i
nitially annoyed with each other’s sound, they eventually 
break through the wall and Run-D.M.C. ends up performing with Aerosmith to an all-white 
audience, leaving their own audience behind.
Run-D.M.C. represented the beginnings of a second genera-
tion of rappers. Their hard, boastful rhymes combined with rock influences helped bring rap to the attention of the 
mainstream audience.338  R o C kin’ ou T
Listening Guide 30Founded in the early 1980s by Joseph “Run” Simmons, Darryl “D.M.C.” 
McDaniels, and Jason “Jam Master Jay” Mizell, Run-D.M.C. is often credited 
with breaking down the barrier between hip hop and mainstream rock and 
roll, introducing hip hop to a huge listening audience that had previously ei-
ther been unaware of it or viewed it as an exclusively urban, African American street phenomenon. Run-D.M.C.’s cover of Aerosmith’s “Walk This Way” was a huge crossover hit. This was the first rap video played on MTV . However, a 
strong rock element was present from the very beginning in their music, and 
you can hear this on “Rock Box,” which is from their first LP .
Musical Style Notes
“Rock Box” contains many stylistic elements of hip hop:
● A sampled drum rhythm track (although the actual beat is a hard rock style).
● Rap-style vocals, with dialogue between Run and D.M.C., voice doublings and echo ef-
fects used to highlight certain words, and rhythmic lyric repetitions.
● Turntable cuts from Jam Master Jay.
In addition to this, however, a definitive rock element is present. The prevailing drum rhythm is a trap-set style, 
hard-rock backbeat—with the emphasis on beats two and four, as opposed to the relentless 1-2-3-4 equal quarter notes heard in some sampled drum tracks. The opening riff, doubled on guitar and bass (first occurring at 0:12), would sound 
completely at home on any heavy metal album. Layered over this is the guitar work of Eddie Martinez, whose wailing solos 
on “Rock Box” were played live in the studio and were reminiscent of a sound more likely to be associated with Hendrix or Stevie Ray Vaughan than with hip hop mixes.
Musical “Road Map”
Timings Commen T s
0:00–0:08 Rap intro—Run
Electric guitar and sampled drum rhythm track is estab-
lished, then stops.
0:08–0:32
0:12Rhythm track re-established.Repeating bass guitar, heavy metal style riff established.Electric guitar solo (Eddie Martinez)
0:32–1:11 Part 1Run begins.Echo effects and D.M.C.’s added. Voices are used to 
highlight and accentuate certain words.
The word fade is both a verbal conclusion and a musical 
cue that leads into the instrumental. break.“Rock Box”
Artist:
 
Run-D.M.C.
Music/Lyrics by Larry Smith,  
Joseph (“Run”) Simmons, and  Darryl (“D.M.C.”) McDaniels
Label:
 
Profile (1984), from the 
LP Run-D.M.C. RAP  A n D  META l  339
Listening Guide 30Timings Commen T s
1:11–1:29 Instrumental section:
Overdubbed electric guitar solo
Sampled rhythm trackSynthesizer
1:30–1:54
1:36Part 2
Run begins.D.M.C. enters over Run’s “Never, never.”
1:54–2:03 Run jumps in with “Bust into the party. . .”
2:03–2:32 D.M.C. begins;
Run joins occasionally to punctuate a word or phrase.Echo effects used again to highlight certain words.
2:32–3:15 Dialogue between Run and D.M.C.Turntable cuts from Jam Master Jay
3:15–3:34 Dialogue between Run and D.M.C.
3:34–3:58 Improvised rap, with lots of rhythmic repetition of words 
and syllables
3:58–4:27 Guitar solo can be heard under rap lyrics.
4:27–5:27
5:11Synth chord pops and cues next section of rap; guitar 
continues at intervals throughout.
Lyrics and music begin to fade.340  R o C kin’ ou TRaising Hell  ’s sales were rivaled only by those of Licensed to Ill by the Beastie Boys, 
white bohemians from Manhattan who were friends of Rubin and were signed to Def Jam. The 
 
Beasties were the first significant white performers in rap, and like Run-D.M.C., they 
 
benefited 
from Rubin’s skill at mixing rock and hip hop aesthetics, heard to great effect on their hit 
 
single, “You’ve Got to Fight for Your Right to Party,” which sounded like a rap version of 
an AC/DC song. 
o
ver the next few years, considerable inroads continued to be made into 
the 
 
album and cassette markets by East Coast rap releases such as 
u
TF
o
’s Lethal, 
ll
 Cool 
J’s 
 
Bigger and 
 
Deffer, Whodini’s Open Sesame, Heavy D. & the Boyz’s Living Large, Eric B. & 
 
Rakim’s Paid in Full, Salt-
n
-Pepa’s Hot, Cool & Vicious, and the Fat Boys’ Crushin’. Eight of 
Billboard’s Top Thirty black albums for the week of 28 
n
ovember 1987 were rap albums.
By this time, the 
l
os Angeles rap scene, which featured harder rhymes set to the slower 
pace of 
l
.A. cruising, was coming into its own. 
i
n 1986, 
i
ce-T recorded “Six in the Morning,” 
which spoke of early morning police raids and threw in a bit of gratuitous misogyny. The 
recording led to 
i
ce-T’s six-year association with Warner that produced Rhyme Pays (1987), 
Power  (1988), Iceberg (1989), and OG (1990). Also in 1986, a sixteen-year-old 
i
ce Cube wrote 
“Boyz 
n
 the Hood,” with Eazy E providing the vocals over a grinding, bass-heavy rhythm 
track created by Dre and Yella. This relationship led to the formation of 
n
.W .A. and the music 
now called gangsta rap, which mixed realism and sensationalism to represent the difficulties of an area—South Central 
l
os Angeles—where “the drug trade, gang structures and rivalries…
and police brutality were combining to destabilize poor communities and alienate massive numbers of youths.”
42 Although l os Angeles is usually considered home to gangsta rap, the 
style can be traced to earlier artists, including Philadelphia rapper Schoolly-D’s “PS
k
,” which 
projected a chilling image of gang membership and directly influenced 
i
ce-T, and to 
n
ew York 
duo 
k
RS-
o
ne and Scott 
l
a Rock of Boogie 
Down Productions, whose Criminal Minded in-
cluded cuts like “South Bronx” and “9mm” that used gangsta vocabulary.
Coinciding with the blossoming of the 
l
os Angeles rap scene was the formation of 
n
ew York’s Public Enemy (PE), whose mem -
bers wrote rap’s most politically advanced lyr-ics. They hailed from 
l
ong 
i
sland and were an 
Public Enemy was among the most socially conscious and 
politically controversial groups in rap. Their early albums  elevated production values and political commentary to  
a new level. RAP  A n D  META l  341extended posse (or crew): leader Chuck D; MC Flavor Flav; DJ Terminator X; a  production 
team (“the Bomb Squad”) of Bill Stephney, Hank Shocklee, and Eric “Vietnam” Sadler; 
 
Professor 
Griff as minister of information; and a paramilitary troop of bodyguards known as Security of 
the First World (S1W). PE sought to advance black nationalism and Afrocentricity with tracks 
as compelling and technically advanced as they were controversial. After cutting their teeth on Yo! Bum Rush the Show, the group hit their stride with It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back (1988) and Fear of a Black Planet (1990). 
o
n Nation of Millions, PE positioned themselves 
among a host of black leaders, including Marcus Garvey, Rosa Parks, Steven Biko, Martin 
l
uther 
k
ing, Malcolm X, and 
n
elson and Winnie Mandela. “This literal act of insertion by 
Public Enemy into the tradition of black resistance,” Brian Cross has written, “collapses the 
boundary between popular culture and politics.”43
As 1988 continued, message rap raised the consciousness of its fans and the blood pres-
sure of its enemies in equal measure. The Nation of Millions cover had a logo with a bereted 
silhouette caught in the crosshairs of a rifle sight. That same year, 
k
RS-
o
ne, after the shooting death of his partner Scott 
l
a Rock, 
released By Any Means Necessary. 
i
nvoking the famous Malcolm 
X photograph, the album cover showed 
k
RS-
o
ne looking out of 
the window with a gun. Clearly, hip hop culture had already be-
come highly politicized by the time 
n
.W .A. released Straight Outta 
Compton (1988). 
n
.W .A. added to the controversy by portraying 
l
os Angeles gang life without 
any distance or moral judgment. Brian Turner, president of Priority, the label that distributed 
n
.W .A., defended the group:
What impressed me about N.W .A. and Eazy-E was that these guys lived the things they talk 
about. All I was hearing on the news was the perspective of the police and outsiders—you never get the perspective of the actual guy they’re talking about. When I saw what these guys wrote, it really hit me that their side of the story is important to tell.
44
not everyone agreed with Turner. Something of a generation gap had developed in black 
music that was especially apparent on black radio. 
o
f the twenty-eight rap songs that reached 
Billboard’s Top Forty sales chart in the first forty-six weeks of 1988, only sixteen registered 
on its airplay chart.45 Clearly, rap was not receiving airplay commensurate with its sales. Tony 
Gray, program director at WR
k
S in 
n
ew York, tried to explain:
Those records appeal to a specific demographic, primarily 12- to 18-year-olds, or perhap. 12- to 
24-year-olds. The battle that [black] radio stations have is that…for marketing reasons they have 
to be concerned with the 25-plus listeners as well. You don’t want to alienate those listeners be-cause that’s where the bulk of your revenue comes from.
46
others saw class as well as generational divisions at work. Bill Adler, publicist for Run-
D.M.C., 
ll
 Cool J, and Public Enemy, put it starkly: “Black radio is run by ‘buppies’ [black 
urban professionals]. They’ve made a cultural commitment to a lifestyle that has nothing to 
do with music on the street….This music very rudely pulls them back on the street corner, 
and they don’t want to go.”47 Artists themselves often identified “bourgeois blacks” as the main 
source of resistance to rap.As 1988 continued, message rap raised 
the consciousness of its fans and the 
blood pressure of its enemies in equal 
measure.
342  R o C kin’ ou Tof course, rap’s detractors had no lack of issues to point to. From different quarters, rap 
was roundly chastised for bigotry, sexism, and/or violence. The cries of anti-Semitism directed 
at Public Enemy’s Professor Griff reached a peak when he claimed in a Washington Times inter-
view that Jews were responsible for “the majority of wickedness that goes on in the world.”48 
(Griff was subsequently fired and then rehired as liaison to the black community.) 
i
n the New 
York Times, critic Jon Pareles berated Professor Griff but also stated that PE’s “overall message is one of self-determination for blacks.”
49 As to rap’s sexist tendencies, Harry Allen noted:
When Ice-T releases a record called “Girls, Let’s Get Buck Naked and Fuck”...when 2 Live Crew 
on a cut called “S & M” calls to women to bring their “d_ _k-sucking friends,” when Ultra-
magnetic M.C.’s Kool Keith…talks about smacking up his bitch in the manner of a pimp, sisters understandably scream.
50
“Hip-hop is sexist,” Allen concluded, but he added, “it is also frank.”51 one wonders if rap would 
have been so upsetting if it had not been so frank. Still, while sexism has never been a stranger 
to any genre of popular music or any aspect of 
u
.S. life, rap’s sexism—for example, its wide-
spread and demeaning references to women as “bitches” and “hoes”—should not be excused.
Evidence of a change in hip hop’s sexual politics became visible in 1985 when Roxanne 
Shanté’s “Roxanne’s Revenge,” the answer track to “Roxanne Roxanne,” 
u
TF
o
’s insult song, 
beat the original at its own game. However, it was the overwhelming commercial success of 
Salt-
n
-Pepa’s double platinum debut 
l
P , Hot, Cool & Vicious (1988), that finally convinced some 
rap labels to promote female rappers, many of whom had been part of the hip hop underground 
for years:
After six years of releasing records, Def Jam finally recorded Nikki D’s “Daddy’s Little Girl,” 
their first track by a female rapper, and Public Enemy recruited Sister Souljah to the ranks. In Los Angeles, Ice Cube put his support behind Yo Yo, …[who] founded the Intelligent Black Woman’s Coalition, hoping to reverse the low status and self-esteem that women were clearly suffering in the face of such a concerted shut-out by men.
52
By the end of the decade, women had added a new voice to hip hop. Pointing to releases like 
“Paper Thin” (MC 
l
yte), “
i
ndependent Woman” (Roxanne Shanté), and “
l
adies First” (Queen 
l
atifah), critics tended to portray women rappers as female correctives to adolescent male 
sexual ranting. However, the reality is more complex.53 not all 
male raps were sexist. (Consider, for example, “Date Rape” by A 
Tribe Called Quest.) But trying to shoehorn groups like Hoes 
with Attitude or Bitches with Problems into a feminist mold was 
obviously problematic. 
i
n fact, even the most progressive female 
rappers resisted the feminist tag, seeing it as a label for a white 
middle-class movement that existed in tension with their commitment to racial solidarity. Per-haps this commitment, more than a tacit approval of male sexism, was what made most female rappers reluctant to speak out publicly against their male counterparts.
The woman who best managed this conflict between racial solidarity and feminism was 
Queen 
l
atifah. Projecting a powerful and dignified image, 
l
atifah developed “a forthright rap-
ping approach that sidestepped the dissing clichés.”54 Through cuts like “Dance for Me” and Even the most progressive female rap-
pers resisted the feminist tag, seeing it 
as a label for a white middle-class move-
ment that existed in tension with their 
commitment to racial solidarity.
Listening Guide 31Queen Latifah’s music is an example of the immediacy and the com-
munity basis in which hip hoppers develop their rhymes. A talented, disci-
plined, and hardworking musician, she became affiliated with the Native 
Tongues movement, started by Afrika Bambaataa and also including the 
Jungle Brothers, De La Soul, and A Tribe Called Quest, which promoted a positive, playful form of Afrocentrism as an alternative to the negative messages put forward by so much rap music of the later 1980s. As part 
of this group, Latifah, whose stage name means “delicate and sensitive” 
in Arabic, fashioned a proud, empowered female response to the misogyny and gangsta violence of much hip hop. In “Ladies First,” Queen Latifah and 
guest artist Monie Love use the medium of hip hop, a genre that in many 
cases objectifies women, to deliver a message about the strength and au-
tonomy of women, thus creating a powerful, courageous new identity for women in hip hop and leaving no question about whether female rappers can compete with the guys.
Musical Style Notes
The instrumental tracks of “Ladies First” feature the trademark hip hop techniques of synth programming and sampling, in 
which digital samples of extant sound files are used as building blocks for a new composition, and often repeat, or loop, the samples. These samples can be anything from turntable scratching to preexisting recordings (see Puff Daddy’s “I’ll Be Watch-
ing You”), to the funky horns and the sampled alto sax squeal heard on “Ladies First.” Vocally, we hear another hallmark of hip 
hop, which is a dialogue between two rappers, each reinforcing the other’s point of view and adding to the argument.
Musical “Road Map”
Timings Commen T s
0:00–0:18 Introduction
Synthesized, funk-style horn and drum samples
0:18–0:29 Verse 1
0:29–0:53 Verse 1 (response)
0:53–1:12 Verse 2
1:12–1:30 Verse 2 (response)
1:30–2:04 Instrumental interlude—same material as Introduction
2:04–2:14 Verse 3
2:14–2:24 Verse continues, with dialogue between
Queen Latifah and Monie Love.
2:24–2:59 Verse 4 (response)
2:59–3:133:13–3:17Verse 4 (response)
3:17–3:56 Horn samples continue.Break at 3:35; sound reduced to only drum and alto 
sax samples.
Music fades; ends 3:56.Ladies First”
Artist:
 
Queen Latifah
Music/Lyrics by Dr. Shane Faber, 
Mark James (DJ Mark the 45 King), Simone Johnson, Dana Owens (Queen Latifah), and Anthony Peaks
Label: Tommy Boy, from the  
CD 
All Hail the Queen  (1989)
 RAP  A n D  META l  343344  R o C kin’ ou T“Come into My House,” she established herself as a 
rapper as talented as her male counterparts. She re-leased her first album, All Hail the Queen, on Tommy 
Boy in 1989. 
o
n the video for its most popular 
cut, “
l
adies First”—performed as a duet with her 
 “European sister” Monie 
l
ove—
l
atifah positioned 
herself as a military strategist alongside black 
women activists such as Sojourner Truth, Angela Davis, and Winnie Mandela, thus offering a pro-
 
female version of the predominantly male lineage 
portrayed in other political rap videos.
Still, rap’s objectification and exploitation of 
women continued. 
i
t was expressed most straightforwardly by the Miami-based 2 
l
ive Crew 
on Move Something (1988) and As Nasty as They Wanna Be (1989).
Violence was the third issue that rap’s critics frequently decried. The confrontational 
stance and uncompromising lyrics of Public Enemy (“Fight the Power”) and 
n
.W .A. (“_ _ _ _ 
tha Police”) and the skirmishes at rap concerts fueled the notion that rap promoted violence. 
Violence had occurred at some shows, but that did not distinguish rap concerts from rock con-certs or, for that matter, any number of sporting events. Rappers themselves addressed this problem head-on. Following the leadership of critic 
n
elson George, in 1989, a number of rap 
groups—Stetsasonic, Boogie Down Productions, and PE, among others—initiated a campaign called Stop the Violence, aimed at black-on-black crime. Among other projects, these groups helped create “Self-Destruction,” the all-star rap recording that became the movement’s an-
them. “Self-Destruction” exemplified a point made by David 
n
athan, that “any examination of 
rap’s lyrical content reveals a very high percentage of anti-violent, anti-drug messages, many 
aimed at…encouraging the youth of the 80s to continue their education and approach adult-hood with a positive approach.”
55 This side of rap, which stood in sharp contrast to the lyric 
vacuity of most black pop at the time, tended to get lost in the controversy.
A year after the release of “Self-Destruction,” West Coast rappers followed suit with 
“We’re All in the Same Gang.” 
i
ronically, the West Coast effort occurred amid bitter splits 
among members of the 
n
.W .A. posse. Following the success of Straight Outta Compton, 
i
ce 
Cube left the group over disputes about creative control and money. Collaborating with Public 
Enemy’s production team, the Bomb Squad, 
i
ce Cube released the Top Twenty Amerikkka’s 
Most Wanted, one of 1990’s best-selling albums. 
i
t launched 
i
ce Cube on a highly successful solo 
career in rap and led to his best-selling 
l
Ps Death Certificate (1991), Predator (1992), and Lethal 
Injection (1993). 
n
.W .A. responded with Efil4zaggin in 1991, after which Dr. Dre also left the 
group. He returned as a solo act the following year with The Chronic, an album that introduced 
the rapper Snoop Dogg to a wider listenership and confirmed gangster rap’s status as the 
dominant style of commercial rap music.
Despite the turmoil surrounding rap, major record companies recognized the sound’s 
financial potential. Few signed rap acts directly, but buy-ins and distribution deals with suc-cessful rap indies became commonplace.
56 Rap’s access to mainstream outlets grew accord -
ingly, with the result that rap tended to get more support on pop radio than on black radio. Queen Latifah was one of the most intelligent 
and articulate women in rap. Her forceful rhymes added measurably to the chorus of 
female voices that began to emerge in the 
late 1980s. In the 1990s she starred in the television sitcom Living Single, then made the leap to films.
 RAP  A n D  META l  345Even MTV initiated a rap show. Buried at first in a late-night week-
end slot, Yo! MTV Raps soon moved to a daily afternoon slot and became one of the channel’s most popular shows. 
i
n 1988, 
n
ARAS 
added a rap category to the Grammy Awards. However, it refused 
to include the rap award in its live telecast, which led four of the five nominees, including winners D.J. Jazzy Jeff & the Fresh Prince, to boycott the show. Shortly thereafter, Billboard quietly added a 
rap chart to its pages.
Entrance into the mainstream led to exposure in other media. After winning the rap 
Grammy, Will Smith (the Fresh Prince) landed a starring role in a prime-time sitcom, The Fresh Prince of Bel Air. The poignant comedy/variety show In Living Color, grounded in a hip hop 
aesthetic, featured artists like Monie 
l
ove and Queen 
l
atifah, who later had her own sitcom, 
Living Single. Some of rap’s most powerful statements came through film. When 
k
id 
n
 Play 
parlayed their 
l
P Funhouse into the film House Party (plus a sequel and a Saturday-
 
morning 
cartoon show), they only hinted at the connections between rap and topical film. Spike 
l
ee’s 
Do the Right Thing, powered by Public Enemy’s “Fight the Power,” tied rap and topical film 
tightly together. Following the success of 
l
ee’s devastating treatment of race relations, a rash 
of black-directed films appeared about life in the ’hood. Straight Outta Brooklyn,  Juice,  Menace 
II Society,  New Jack City, and Boyz N the Hood—the latter two starring 
i
ce-T and 
i
ce Cube, 
respectively, and featuring their music—were built around what media scholar Craig Watkins called a “ghettocentric imagination” through which filmmakers, like their musical counterparts, “struggled to rearticulate the lived experiences of poor [black] youth.”
57
in 1990, rapper/dancer Hammer (then M.C. Hammer) scored another first for rap with 
Please Hammer Don’t Hurt ’Em, which logged twenty-one weeks at number one on the pop 
charts and became the best-selling rap album ever. With sales of over 10 million copies, it 
outdistanced its nearest competitor by a factor of two. Ambitious to the core, Hammer set his 
sights on nothing short of toppling Michael Jackson. Roundly dissed by the hip hop nation for playing to mainstream sensibilities, Hammer enlisted James Brown to bolster his credibility. 
i
n 
the long-form prologue to the “2 
l
egit to Quit” video, Brown anoints Hammer as his godson 
and directs him to “bring back the glove”—an obvious reference to Michael Jackson and there-
fore to the pop crown.
i
ronically, Hammer’s pop tendencies may have created cultural space for his main com-
petition, white rapper Vanilla 
i
ce. After 
i
ce toured as Hammer’s opening act, his 
l
P To the 
Extreme skyrocketed to number one on the pop charts and multiplatinum certification, tem-
porarily displacing Hammer himself. 
i
ce ran into credibility problems when it was discovered 
that part of his biography had been falsified to make him look more “street.” This drive “to 
be more ‘authentic,’” according to 
k
ristal Brent Zook, “demonstrates that an increasing sense 
of African-American solidarity seems to inspire an increasingly blatant demand for inclusion 
among (some) white people who now sense themselves uncomfortably shifting from center to 
margin.”58 Another group of white rappers, Young Black Teenagers, included a song called 
“Proud to Be Black” in their debut album, pushing identification with black culture to the limit. 
o
ther white rap groups, such as Third Base, gained acceptance by other rappers based on a 
certain repudiation of white skin privilege in their own lifestyles.Rap tended to get more support on 
pop radio than on black radio. Even MTV 
initiated a rap show. Buried at first in a 
late-night weekend slot, Yo! 
m
TV Raps 
soon moved to a daily afternoon slot 
and became one of the channel’s most 
popular shows.
346  R o C kin’ ou TWhile white rappers struggled to assert their legitimacy, rap’s broader  diversification 
took hold in 
l
os Angeles. 
i
n 1989, Chicano 
k
id Frost recorded the bilingual Hispanic 
 
Causing 
Panic. He was joined in short order by Cubanos Melloman Ace and Skatemaster Tate. 
n
amed 
after the discharge of a shotgun, the Boo Yaa Tribe—Samoan ex-gang members from south-
east 
l
os Angeles—composed raps “written in hardcore prison slang, with joy, pleasure, 
identity and emergence expressed in metaphors of death, violence, intimidation, fear and im-prisonment.”
59 Against this background, the group’s members have talked openly about their 
respect for women in their culture.
The most diverse 
l
os Angeles posse was the Soul Assassins, with Cypress Hill at its 
center (including Grandmixer Muggs, an 
i
talian; B-Real, a Chicano; and Sen Dogg, a Cuban). 
k
nown for their “old school” hook lines and harmonic approach and B-Real’s characteristic 
nasal whine, Cypress Hill’s 1991 debut single, “How 
i
 Could Just 
k
ill a Man,” propelled the 
group to national recognition; and their second album, Black Sunday (1993), debuted at number 
one on the pop charts. Muggs soon set up the Soul Assassins as a production company that in-cluded FunkDoobiest and House of Pain. Among FunkDoobiest’s members were Puerto Rican and Sioux MCs and a Mexican DJ. House of Pain—
i
rish with a 
l
atvian DJ—achieved national 
fame with the 1992 single “Jump Around” and the 
l
P Fine Malt Lyrics.
By the early 1990s, then, hip hop had become, as Brian Cross wrote, “a voice for many 
different subjectivities—women, Chicano, Cubano, Asian, 
i
rish, gay, and all the variants cov-
ered by black, Jamaican, Dominican, etc.”60 According to Cross, far from detracting from the 
African American cultural priorities that determined the trajectory of rap, hip hop’s expansion 
“brings the struggle of African-Americans to many new ears, thereby providing a new perspec-
tive on one’s own problems.”61 From an isolated street culture, hip hop had grown in less than 
twenty years into a global phenomenon. Perhaps because of this success, it became the focus of 
such a ferocious backlash.
Regulating Popular Music: The Politics of Censorship
Popular music has long provoked controversy or opposition. Herman Gray noted three periods of particularly strong opposition: the response to jazz in the early part of the twentieth century, the reaction against rock ‘n’ roll in the 1950s and 1960s, and the 1980s wave of controversy as-
sociated with heavy metal and rap.
62 Certain themes run through all three periods. Some people 
fear that sensual rhythms can overcome rationality or that lyrics can undermine moral values. 
Because of these fears, people have attempted at times to link these genres to drug abuse, law-
less behavior, and general moral decline. 
i
n turn, all of these problems have been projected to 
some degree onto race.
i
n 
l
awrence Grossberg’s view, the most recent round of attacks on popular music from 
the mid-1980s onward can be ascribed to the new conservatism espoused by Christian funda-
mentalists, conservative elitists, and organizations like the PMRC.63 His analysis is shared by 
n
an 
l
evinson, a Tufts 
u
niversity professor and correspondent for Index on Censorship. “Though 
usually played as revolts of the fed up,” 
l
evinson has said, “these skirmishes are likely to be 
nurtured or orchestrated by organizations of the extreme moralist right.”64 Both Grossberg 
 RAP  A n D  META l  347and l evinson believe these groups are linked by common tenets, such as a narrow interpreta-
tion of the “Christian way of life,” and certain sound-bite concepts, such as “family values,” that 
are media codes for conservatism.
Aligning with the new conservatism, the popular press began to cast music as a social 
irritant and its detractors as defenders of decent society. The assumption—often made tac-
itly—was that popular music communicated messages through its lyrics, visual images, hyp-notic rhythms, subliminal suggestions, and sheer volume to an impressionable young audience, thus producing direct and uni-form effects on their behavior. 
o
f course, musical communication 
is far more complicated than this. As Susan McClary and Robert Walser have pointed out:
Music relies on events and inflections occurring on many interdependent levels (melody, rhythm, 
harmony, timbre, texture, etc.) simultaneously. Each of these has something of a syntactical dimen-sion—a grammar of expectations, normal continuity, etc.—and also a wide-open semiotic dimen-sion….When all these levels are operating at the same time,…we are dealing with a tangle that pages and pages of words can only begin to unpack.
65
Add to this the visual dimension of music video, which frequently eschews narrative or-
ganization altogether, and the complexity of communication increases significantly. Music is 
polysemic: 
i
t communicates on many levels at once. 
i
ts meaning may be different for different 
people in different places, and that meaning may change over time. This is not to suggest that 
popular music has no effects; it was certainly related in some way, for example, to the social 
transformations of the 1960s. Today, however, that same music is used to sell beer, cars, and running shoes. During the mega-events of the 1980s, popular music mobilized masses of peo-ple toward particular political ends. At the same time, it opened new markets for and delivered new consumers to transnational corporations.
Music that glorifies violence or degrades women may at times deserve reprisal. However, 
music must be considered in proportion with many variables that bear on these problems—
 
including questions of social and economic inequality, differential understandings of race, class 
and sexual identities, and cultural and political conflicts over such issues as drug use, obscenity, education, and religion. 
i
n the 1980s and 1990s, however, as in the jazz era and the heyday of rock 
‘n’ roll, the reaction to popular music seemed to lack such a sense of proportion. 
i
ndeed, many 
critics seemed to hold popular music solely responsible for (and even more harmful than) the social problems it referenced, as in the government investigation initiated by the PMRC in 1985.
The Parents Music Resource Center
The Parents Music Resource Center (PMRC) was founded in early 1985 by a group of prom-
inent women in Washington, D.C., including Tipper Gore, wife of then-senator Al Gore; Sally 
n
evius, whose husband had chaired the D.C. city council; and Susan Baker, whose 
husband, James Baker, was then secretary of the treasury. 
o
f the twenty original mem-
bers—dubbed the Washington wives—seventeen were married to influential Washington 
politicians.66 Concerned, as they said, “about the growing trend in music toward lyrics that Aligning with the new conservatism, 
the popular press began to cast music 
as a social irritant and its detractors as 
defenders of decent society.
348  R o C kin’ ou Tare sexually explicit, excessively violent, or glorify the use of drugs and alcohol”—as evi-
denced in Prince’s “
n
ikki Darling” and Madonna’s “
l
ike a Virgin”—they decided to exploit 
their personal connections to “educate and inform parents about this alarming trend as well 
as to ask the industry to exercise self-restraint.”67 The PMRC consistently maintained that it 
was in favor of voluntary measures, not censorship, and that it was not opposed to all forms 
of popular music.
With a contribution from Mike 
l
ove of the Beach Boys and office space donated by Coors 
Beer (known for its anti-unionism and its donations to extremely conservative organizations), 
the group set up shop and formed an alliance with the national Parent/Teacher Association (PTA), gaining access to 5.6 million PTA members. The PMRC wanted the music industry to publish the lyrics to all new releases and institute a rating system (“X” for explicit lyrics, “V” for violence, “
o
” for occult, and so on) akin to that employed by the 
u
.S. film industry, 
whose rating system had been implemented by the Motion Picture Association of America in 1968.
68 in August 1985, Stan Gortikov, then president of the Recording i ndustry Associa-
tion of 
 
America (R
i
AA), offered a compromise generic warning: “PARE
n
TA
l
 ADV
i
S
o
RY/
 
EXP
li
C
i
T 
l
YR
i
CS.” Acknowledging the legitimacy of the PMRC’s concerns, he cited only 
legal and logistical problems as the reason for the compromise.
Such problems did exist. “
u
nlike the motion picture industry, which rates about 325 
films a year,” Gortikov noted, “the recording industry releases 25,000 songs annually, which would require a process for rating 100 tunes a day.”
69 He also pointed out that publication 
of lyrics without the publisher’s permission would violate copyright laws. There were even 
greater difficulties of interpretation. As Simon Frith asserted long ago, different consumers at-
tach competing meanings to their experiences of music.70 Recording practices like echo, distor-
tion, and backmasking (recording passages backward), which have led to charges of subliminal 
messages, further complicate any discussion of meaning. The mind boggles at the thought of a 
committee trying to make definitive cultural sense out of all of this, especially given the confu-
sion over meaning that the music industry itself reported during the hearings. Frank Zappa recalled one record company executive who forced his group to excise the phrase And I still remember mama with her apron and her pad/ Feeding all the boys at Ed’s Cafe because he thought that the word pad referred to a sanitary napkin.
71
if Gortikov’s willingness to compromise suggested that the music industry had surren-
dered to minimal pressure, it began to make more sense when the PMRC rejected his sugges-
tion and unleashed its full powers or, more accurately, that of its members’ mates. 
i
n September, 
the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation held public hearings on 
the PMRC’s charges. Among others on the committee were John Danforth (chair), and Fritz 
 
Hollings and Al Gore, whose wives were PMRC members. Gortikov knew that the industry 
faced both legislation and regulation if it did not cooperate. Adding further pressure on the industry to cooperate was the home-taping bill (H.R. 2911), championed by record companies, which would have levied a tax on blank tape, enabling record companies to recover millions of dollars in revenues presumably lost because of home taping. Representative Thomas Downey was a sponsor of the bill and a past recipient of the R
i
AA’s culture award; his wife was a PMRC 
member. When hearings on the House bill stalled, the industry looked to the Senate for help; 
the co-sponsor of the Senate bill (S. 1739) was Al Gore.HEAR MORE
Tipper Gore on 
MySearchLab RAP  A n D  META l  349The 1985 PMRC hearings were reminiscent of the 1959 
payola hearings. 
o
nce again, morally high-toned critics advocated 
protecting innocent children from the evils of popular music. Tes-
timony from the young people allegedly affected was notably ab-
sent. 
u
nlike the payola hearings, however, the players did not fall 
into neatly defined interest groups. 
i
mportant labels, including 
MCA, A&M, and Geffen, initially broke ranks with the R
i
AA and 
joined a group of smaller labels to form an anticensorship group, the Musical Majority. While 
Smokey Robinson and Mike 
l
ove spoke out against so-called porn rock, artists ranging from 
Frank Zappa and Dee Snider of Twisted Sister to John Denver and Donny 
o
smond denounced 
the rating system.
Denver testified about the dangers of being overly literal in interpreting lyrics, recount -
ing how some radio stations had refused to broadcast his “Rocky Mountain High” because they 
thought it was about drugs. PMRC co-founder Susan Baker had attempted to anticipate such warnings by pointing out earlier that Cole Porter’s “The Birds Do 
i
t, The Bees Do 
i
t” could 
hardly be compared to W .A.S.P .’s “F-
u
-C-
k
 
l
ike a Beast.”72 However, Baker neglected to men-
tion that the W .A.S.P . song had never been released in the 
u
nited States or that the Porter clas-
sic could be compared to the Captain and Tennille’s “Do That to Me 
o
ne More Time,” which, 
according to Zappa, had appeared on the PMRC’s original hit list.73 omissions like these left 
many openly suspicious of the proceedings. “Beneath the ‘save the children’ rhetoric,” editorial-
ized Rolling Stone, “is an attempt by a politically powerful minority to impose its morality on 
the rest of us.”74
in n ovember 1985, shortly after the hearings, a compromise was reached between the 
R
i
AA and the PMRC. Essentially, the PMRC ended up agreeing to Gortikov’s original pro-
posal. With a voluntary rating system now in place, questions remained about what was con-
sidered offensive and how serious it was. These were the arenas in which the PMRC scored its 
greatest victories in terms of framing the issues and capturing public attention.
The Issues: Sex, Drugs, and Rock ‘n’ Roll Revisited
in 1988, the PMRC produced a video, Rising to the Challenge, outlining “five major themes” of 
concern to them in popular music:
 
1.
 
Abuse of drugs and alcohol
 
2.
 
Suicide
 
3.
 
Graphic violence
 
4.
 
Fascination with the occult
 
5.
 
A sexuality that is graphic and explicit75
The PMRC claimed that these themes “occurred consistently in some rock music and  especially 
in heavy metal.”76 At the time, they maintained that heavy metal was “the most disturbing ele-
ment in contemporary music,” claiming that “much of it dwells on themes that glorify rape, 
sado-masochism, violence, and suicide.”77 The fact is that, beginning with Chaucer’s Canterbury 
Tales, Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet, and Dante’s Inferno, sex, drugs, violence, suicide, and the The 1985 PMRC hearings were remi-
niscent of the 1959 payola hearings. 
Once again, morally high-toned critics 
advocated protecting innocent children 
from the evils of popular music. Testi-mony from the young people allegedly affected was notably absent.
350  R o C kin’ ou Tdevil have always been compelling themes in Western art and often in the lives of its practi -
tioners. “[Berlioz’s] program for the Symphonie Fantastique,” Walser has noted, “explicitly con-
nects opium use with the rhetorical splendor of his music. Abuse of alcohol is well documented 
for composers such as Schumann, Schubert, and Mussorgsky.”78 People magazine reported that 
“Cole Porter’s ‘
l
ove for Sale’ was considered so ‘blue’ that it could be broadcast only in in-
strumental form….Duke Ellington’s ‘The Mooche’ was considered so provocative that some blamed it for a national rise in incidents of rape.”
79
in targeting heavy metal—and then rap—the PMRC and its allies were drawing a line 
between themselves and youth. 
i
n so doing, they made it clear that other forms of music—
even other forms of popular music—would not be subjected to the same scrutiny. Country mu-
sic, for example, remained largely untouched by the PMRC, even 
though it has often dealt with themes of sex, violence, and alco-hol. Critic Dave Marsh noted this double standard when he wrote, “
i
magine how the rapper 
i
ce Cube would be denounced for a song 
about drunkenly disrupting an old girlfriend’s wedding and threat-ening the groom, then setting out on a bender with his crew. That is exactly the story line of Garth Brooks’s ‘
i
’ve Got Friends in 
l
ow 
Places.’”80
in some ways, the country music industry relished the attacks on rap and heavy metal. 
“Every morning when they play that stuff,” said Jimmy Bowen, head of 
n
ashville’s 
l
iberty 
Records, “people come running to us.”81 Frank Zappa even suggested that the rating system 
would “have the effect of protectionist legislation for the country music industry.”82 This is not 
to suggest that country’s increased appeal was due only to the campaign against rap and metal. 
i
n a conservative political period, one would expect a music that has always been coded conser-
vative to thrive. Albums by country artists like Randy Travis, George Strait, Clint Black, and Garth Brooks began to appear regularly among the best-selling pop albums of the year, his-torically a rare occurrence for country music. This trend carried into the 1990s, when country music enjoyed unprecedented chart success , as will be explored in Chapter 11.
The selective application of their research to rap and metal raised serious questions about 
whether the PMRC campaign was really about truth in advertising, as the group claimed. 
i
n 
his testimony at the PMRC hearings, Stan Gortikov hinted at a more troubling agenda when he expressed the “fear that the only acceptable translation of the wishes of the PMRC will somehow constitute a de facto first stage form of censorship.”
83 once the rating system was 
created in 1985, many retail record outlets, in fact, refused to carry stickered products, fearing 
organized consumer protests over them. These stores included department stores like Sears 
and J.C. Penney as well as music chains like Record World, Disc Jockey, and Camelot Music, the 
second largest chain in the country. The hugely influential Wal-Mart chain took the practice one step further, refusing to carry a growing list of nonstickered records, too.
84
By 1990, nineteen states had considered legislation requiring lyric labeling; some proposed 
laws would subject stores to criminal liability if they carried stickered products.85 (At the same 
time, a spate of proposed legislation aimed to regulate live concerts and volume levels on boom 
boxes.) 
i
n 1992, the police chief of Guilderland, 
n
ew York, sent a letter to local music stores 
warning about the legality of selling stickered records, even though selling stickered records In targeting heavy metal—and then 
rap—the PMRC and its allies were 
drawing a line between themselves and 
youth. In so doing, they made it clear 
that other forms of music—even other forms of popular music—would not be subjected to the same scrutiny.
 RAP  A n D  META l  351was not illegal.86 That same year, four record out-
lets in 
o
maha, 
n
ebraska, were charged with vio-
lating the state’s harmful-to-minors law when they 
sold stickered 
l
Ps to teenagers.87 if the warning 
 
label was simply to alert parents to controversial 
material, as the PMRC contended, why was it being 
used as a basis for criminalization? The fact is that  
the 1985 PMRC hearings marked the beginning of 
an intensified effort to put popular music on trial.
Shortly after the hearings, 
o
zzy 
o
sbourne 
was sued by a couple who alleged that his song 
“Suicide Solution” had caused their nineteen-year-old son, John McCullom, to shoot himself. The case 
became a cause célèbre for the PMRC; the song and McCullom’s death were highlighted in Rising to the Challenge a few years later. 
o
sbourne’s claim that the song was antisuicide was 
not fully convincing—his lyrics were open to the interpretation that suicide was a legitimate 
escape from life’s problems—but the court dismissed the lawsuit. The arguments over the lyr-ics’ meanings simply underscored the complexity of how music communicates. As Walser has pointed out, “Music does not simply inflict its meanings upon helpless fans…indeed, the evi-dence suggests that only a tiny minority of fans found ‘Suicide Solution’ depressing rather than sobering and thought-provoking.”
88
A late-1980s ABC 20/20 broadcast corroborated Walser’s view. The show addressed a 
suicide case involving two Chicago teenagers, 
n
ancy Grannan and 
k
aren 
l
ogan, who were 
found dead clutching a note with the lyrics to Metallica’s “Fade to Black.” The PMRC blamed 
the song for encouraging suicide. The 20/20 segment included interviews with high school 
students and journalist Charles M. Young. Said Young, “Heavy metal speaks to the anger and despair of teenagers today the same way the blues used to speak to the despair and anger of black people in the South. Without heavy metal, there would probably be more suicides be-cause metal and certain other forms of rock give teenagers something to believe in that they get no place else.”
89 While Metallica acknowledged the tragedy in an interview in Parade maga -
zine, bassist Jason 
n
ewsted also said, “
i
 wish you could hear all the kids that come up to us 
and say, ‘
i
f it weren’t for “Fade to Black”…
i
’d be dead now.’…And there’s hundreds of those.”90 
n
ewsted’s claims are further supported by sociologist Donna Gaines, who noted in her study 
Since he began his career as lead singer for Black Sabbath in 
the late 1960s, Ozzy Osbourne has been a target of conservative religious groups and watchdog organizations. Still, he has  
managed to turn his demonic glare into pure gold.352  R o C kin’ ou Tof teen suicide, Teenage Wasteland, that “Fade to Black” is a song that “goes to the bottom, but 
comes back up. 
i
t gives you the will to power, to triumph. 
i
t’s cathartic; it’s killer.”91
The most celebrated suicide case was the 1992 lawsuit alleging that subliminal messages 
on Judas Priest’s Stained Class caused Ray Belknap and Jay Vance of Reno, 
n
evada, to kill them-
selves. Because lyrics about suicide had already been ruled protected speech in the 
o
sbourne 
trial, the plaintiffs built their case around alleged subliminal commands in the 
l
P to “do it” and 
backward messages exhorting “try suicide,” “suicide is in,” and “sing my evil spirit.” When it 
was revealed that Vance and Belknap came from severely troubled backgrounds that could eas-
ily have accounted for their suicides, Judas Priest was cleared of all charges. The judge found that subliminal messages, if any, on the album were neither intentional nor necessary to explain the suicide pact. He did leave the door open, however, to future lawsuits in ruling that “sub-liminal messages and ‘backmasking’…are not protected speech under the First Amendment.”
92
Subliminal messages and backmasking also figured heavily in charges of Satanism, an 
issue revealing the affinity between the PMRC and the religious right. Prominent among 
 
Christian fundamentalists attempting to link popular music and Satanism were James 
 
Dobson, 
leader of Focus on the Family; Dan and Steve Peters, ministers in St. Paul; and the Reverend Donald Wildmon, head of the Mississippi-based American Family Association. 
i
n the late 1980s 
and early 1990s, with the PMRC’s Susan Baker on its board of directors, Focus on the Family campaigned vigorously to remove “objectionable” records from stores. The Peters brothers, who lectured widely on the evils of popular music, were endorsed by PMRC co-founder Sally 
n
evius, who said, “
i
t was guys like them who got the rock & roll wrecking ball rolling in the 
right direction.”93 While no organizational connection existed between Wildmon’s group and 
the PMRC, a 1990 Time magazine article, titled “
n
o Sympathy for the Devil,” suggested an 
ideological one, describing the campaigns of both groups in similar terms.94
Wildly divergent estimates are given as to how widespread and how dangerous  Satanism 
is. 
i
n 1985, Darlyne Pettinicchio, a consultant on gangs for police agencies and a staffer at 
the Back in Control center—a counseling program that advocated, 
among other things, “deprogramming” youth who had fallen 
 
under 
the spell of heavy metal—estimated that over 1 million 
 
Americans 
were in covens.95 in contrast, David Alexander wrote in the 
 
Humanist that the number was under a thousand. He also pointed 
out that Satanism was a protected religion under the First Amend -
ment and that no Satanists had been charged in any ritual crimes.96 
l
aw enforcement agencies, in particular, have tended to view Satanism as dangerous. Writing 
in The National Sheriff, Robert J. Barry maintained, “ Across the country law enforcement orga-
nizations are receiving reports of homicide, mayhem, assault, suicide, child abuse and animal 
mutilations that are linked with the satanic occult.”97 Barry went on to claim, “ o ne of the major 
contemporary movements exploiting Satanism is the music industry and its punk rock and 
‘heavy metal’ productions.”98
Despite little evidence to validate Barry’s claims, the issue of Satanism in popular music 
persisted. 
i
t reached fever pitch in 1990 when 
n
ew York’s cardinal John J. 
o
’Connor warned his 
flock that “diabolically instigated violence is on the rise”99 and noted that “some kinds of rock 
music” were the devil’s tool, singling out 
o
zzy 
o
sbourne’s “Suicide Solution” as an example.100 In 1985, the Back in Control center—
a counseling program that advocated, 
among other things, “deprogramming” 
youth who had fallen under the spell of 
heavy metal—estimated that over 1 mil-lion Americans were in covens.
 RAP  A n D  META l  353This was three weeks after J. Gordon Melton, head of the i nstitute for the Study of American 
Religion, reported that “press reports of satanic activities showed no increase and that upon 
investigation many of the most dramatic reports turned out to be without basis.”101
if the crusaders who attacked heavy metal were serious about making the connection be-
tween popular music and violent crime, why didn’t they challenge Tom Metzger, a former 
k
u 
k
lux 
k
lansman and leader of the White Aryan Resistance (WAR), and his son John when they 
organized an Aryan Woodstock for their followers in 1989? Where were they when New York 
Times critic Jon Pareles took Public Enemy to task for their anti-Semitism and criticized Guns 
n
’ Roses for their use of nigger and faggot?102 Because neither racism nor bigotry had been on 
their agenda, these concerns went largely unmentioned until Pareles reframed the issues.
The way a problem is framed can shape responses to it. 
n
owhere was this more appar-
ent than in the PMRC’s concern over “a sexuality that is graphic and explicit,” which made sexuality itself the problem. Thus, no distinctions were permitted between sexuality that is violent and degrading to women and sexuality that is mutual and sensuous. 
i
n this phrasing, 
it mattered not whether a woman was a passive victim or actively in control of her sexual choices. The PMRC’s inability to make finer distinctions led only to the conclusion that “sex is bad,” a disorienting and repressive message for teenagers at a crucial stage in their sexual development.
Madonna was the main target of the PMRC’s concerns about sexuality. Susan Baker 
said that “
l
ike a Virgin” moved her to become a founding member of the PMRC. Pam Howar 
expressed the concern that Madonna was teaching young girls “how to be porn queens in 
heat.”103 Madonna was forthright in her promotion of safe sex, speaking out publicly on the 
issue, performing at A
i
DS benefits, including informational materials in her albums, and dis-
tributing condoms at her concerts. 
i
n so doing, she had become a major source of irritation for 
the PMRC and the religious right. Her “Justify My 
l
ove” video was, for some, the final straw. 
The video contained not-quite-explicit sex, complicated by insinuations of homosexuality and 
group sex. 
i
n its ambiguity, it forced viewers to grapple with the complexities of sex that her 
PMRC critics refused to recognize. “Justify My 
l
ove” earned the distinction of being the first 
video officially banned by MTV , a status that quickly turned it into the best-selling music video 
in history.
Another battle that pitted First Amendment defenses against fundamentalist dismissals 
of all sexually provocative material concerned the Dead 
k
ennedys. 
i
n April 1986, Jello Biafra, 
the band’s leader, was arrested for distributing harmful material to a minor. The arrest came 
after a complaint made by the parents of a young girl who purchased the band’s Frankenchrist  
album, which included the graphic poster Penis Landscape by the award-winning Swiss artist H. R. Giger. Criminal charges were also leveled at Biafra’s record company, his distributor, the 
l
.A. wholesaler, and even the sixty-seven-year-old owner of the pressing plant that manu-
factured the record. The store that sold the record was not charged because, according to the police, “[t]hey were cooperative and took the record off the shelves.”
104
The Dead k ennedys’ bust had all the markings of a test case. Apparently, the district 
attorney thought that the label, Alternative Tentacles, would be an easy target because it was 
a small company that could ill afford an expensive legal battle.105 Biafra, however, proved a 
worthy opponent—unsurprisingly for someone who years earlier had run for mayor of San 354  R o C kin’ ou TFrancisco and placed fourth in a field of ten candidates. Defending his artistic choices as po-
litical speech, he argued that the Giger poster resonated with themes that ran through the Frankenchrist album. The case ended with all defendants cleared, but the protracted legal battle 
bankrupted Alternative Tentacles and ended the career of the Dead 
k
ennedys.
This obscenity case was followed by several others that received nationwide coverage. 
i
n 
June 1988, Alabama record store owner Tommy Hammond was arrested on obscenity charges 
for selling 2 
l
ive Crew’s Move Something to an adult undercover agent even though the album 
had not been judged obscene by any court. 
i
n fact, Hammond kept the albums behind the coun-
ter and refused to sell them to minors because they carried a warning sticker. 
n
evertheless, a 
municipal court judge fined Hammond $500, and declared the album obscene. Hammond ap-
pealed and was eventually acquitted, but neither 2 
l
ive Crew nor sellers of their albums were 
done with obscenity charges.
i
n 1990, 2 
l
ive Crew’s 
l
P As Nasty As They Wanna Be became the first recording to be 
declared obscene by a federal district court. After the ruling, the group was arrested for per-
forming some of the album’s material at an adults-only nightclub. Charles Freeman, an African American record-store owner from Fort 
l
auderdale, Florida, was also arrested for selling the 
l
P . 
l
ike the Dead 
k
ennedys, 2 
l
ive Crew was thought to be an easy target. Their detailed 
sexual raps were bound to be considered offensive by many, and the record was produced by a small, independent label that had no money for an extended legal battle.
The 2 
l
ive Crew case is important not only because it tested the strength of the First 
Amendment, but also because it confronted the racism associated with the application of the 
obscenity laws. Currently, a three-pronged legal test determines obscenity. A work must (1) lack serious literary, artistic, political, 
or scientific value; (2) when taken as a whole, appeal to prurient in-
terest; and (3) be patently offensive, as judged by community stan-dards.
106 Given this third prong, what the Supreme Court has called 
the “dim and uncertain” line separating obscenity from constitu-
tionally protected speech can change from one locale to another. A 
work judged obscene in Florida may be perfectly legal in 
n
ew York; which was, in fact, the case 
with the 2 
l
ive Crew recording.
The complexity of determining community standards was the basis of 2 
l
ive Crew’s de-
fense. Appearing as an expert witness, eminent African American scholar Henry 
l
ouis Gates, 
Jr., testified that 2 
l
ive Crew’s risqué rhymes were part of the venerable tradition of competi-
tive African American word games such as signifying and playing the dozens, and that judg-
ing the legal status of 2 
l
ive Crew’s work, therefore, required a familiarity with “black codes,” 
which had been absent in the original determination of obscenity.107 The defense prevailed and 
2 
l
ive Crew was acquitted. That didn’t help Charles Freeman, who was convicted and fined 
$1,000 for selling the record in a separate trial. The obscenity ruling itself was overturned on 
appeal in May 1992 and finally laid to rest when the 
u
.S. Supreme Court refused to challenge 
the appellate decision.108
Charges of obscenity in rap have been second only to charges of violence, which became 
particularly loud in the 1992 election year due to the political fallout from the uprising in 
l
os 
Angeles following the Rodney 
k
ing verdict. (
i
n that case, 
l
.A. police were found not guilty The 2 Live Crew case is important not 
only because it tested the strength of 
the First Amendment, but also because 
it confronted the racism associated 
with the application of the obscenity laws.
 RAP  A n D  META l  355in the brutal beating—captured on video—of k ing, an African American.) When  Presidential 
 candidate Bill Clinton characterized rapper/activist Sister Souljah’s comments about the 
 uprising as “full of hatred,” he was charged with distorting her remarks by 
 
David Mills, the 
Washington Post reporter who had interviewed her: “Clinton really did take her 
 
comment out 
of context. Souljah was describing the attitude of the 
l
.A. rioters, not prescribing future 
action.”109
in the same time period, the rap/metal song “Cop k iller” from i ce-T’s Body Count sparked 
further national debate over rap’s seeming encouragement of violence. Some heard the song’s 
outrage as legitimate; but its violent imagery prompted others, including dozens of police or-
ganizations, to call for a boycott of Time Warner, then the parent company of 
i
ce-T’s record 
label—and even prompted an unsuccessful effort to ban it under federal sedition laws. “Maybe 
i
 underestimate my juice,” said a bewildered 
i
ce-T, “but there’s people out there with nuclear 
bombs, people with armies, and the president has time to sit up and get into it with me?”110
While the furor over “Cop k iller” was similar to the furor over n .W .A.’s “_ _ _ _ tha 
 
Police” a few years earlier, the environment was quite different. Most of the world had seen the 
video of Rodney 
k
ing’s beating and knew the police had been absolved. These events recontex-
tualized the messages of both songs. Moreover, as Barry Shank has pointed out, “Cop 
k
iller” 
was not just another rap song but was recorded by 
i
ce-T’s thrash metal band Body Count. 
By importing gangster rap’s critical perspective on racist police practices into a genre identi-
fied with white suburban listeners, 
i
ce-T crossed a cultural boundary that made his song that 
much more threatening to the organizations that sought to suppress it.111 Tellingly, despite 
widespread opposition among police officers, the 
n
ational Black Police Association denounced 
the Warner boycott, noting that “Cop 
k
iller” “did not happen in a vacuum. People…are talking 
about how African-American people have been victimized by police brutality. And that is very 
real. Where were those organizations when Rodney 
k
ing was beat up and when that verdict 
came in?”112 The association was disappointed when i ce-T agreed to pull the song from future 
pressings of the album. 
l
ike many others, it feared that the action would send “a negative 
 
message to other artists.”113
Shortly afterward, three rappers made headlines for allegedly crossing the line into vio-
lence in real life. 
i
n August 1993, Snoop Doggy Dogg, as he was then called, was charged 
in connection with the fatal shooting of Philip Woldemarian in 
l
os Angeles. 
i
n the incident, 
Snoop’s bodyguard, not Snoop, shot Woldemarian. The rapper pleaded not guilty and was 
eventually acquitted. 
i
n 
o
ctober, Tupac Shakur was arrested for aggravated assault in the 
shooting of two off-duty Atlanta police officers. Three weeks later, he was arrested again with 
two friends on charges of sexual assault (for which he eventually did time). Public Enemy frontman Flavor Flav was arrested for attempted murder and criminal possession of a firearm after confronting his girlfriend’s alleged lover with a gun. Fortunately, he had enough presence of mind to check himself into the Betty Ford Clinic for crack abuse.
Snoop Dogg’s case received more publicity than the others because he had just made 
music history. 
o
n December 11, 1993, Doggystyle became the first debut album ever to en-
ter the Billboard pop charts at number one; it sold more than 800,000 units in its first week. 
Snoop, a protégé of rapper/producer Dr. Dre, was distinguished from other rappers by his 
style, described in the New York Times as “gentle.” “[W]here many rappers scream,” said Times 356  R o C kin’ ou Treporter Touré, “he speaks softly.” Touré then 
added, “While Snoop delivers rhymes deli -
cately, the content is anything but.”114
For Tupac Shakur, both incidents ini-
tially seemed out of character. Described as quiet and shy, Shakur was a formally trained 
actor who had received an 
n
AACP 
i
mage 
Award nomination for his role in the film 
 
Poetic 
Justice. His hit single “
k
eep Ya Head 
u
p,” ac -
cording to Havelock 
n
elson, “speaks urgently 
and respectfully about the struggles of black women.”115 Thus, many observers of the hip hop 
scene found Shakur’s behavior troubling. Havelock 
n
elson argued, “Shakur…is endangering 
more than just his own career. He and other rappers who can’t get a grip…are unwittingly play-ing into the hands of forces fed up with heightened levels of black achievement.”
116
The media blitz following these incidents seemed to suggest the disturbing possibility 
that with rap, there was no difference between art and life. According to this logic, rap could be 
held responsible for all social disintegration. As David Toop pointed out, however, “[c]hildren 
carry automatic weapons like 
u
zis and sell crack in the streets. Babies are born with A
i
DS and 
teenagers are shot dead for their shoes. Music may be powerful and influential but no music is 
strong enough to create this kind of social decay.”117 When James Brown ran afoul of the law, 
no one said funk was to blame. Tupac Shakur’s case was no different. Such instances cannot be 
used legitimately to indict a whole genre of music.
Following these events, media outlets competed to outdo each other’s antiviolence 
 
policies. Black radio station WB
l
S in 
n
ew York banned violence and profanity from its 
broadcasts. The rap magazine Rap Sheet stopped carrying advertisements that pictured guns. 
Black Entertainment Television (BET) instituted a no-guns policy in the videos they aired. Within the black community, protests against gangsta rap escalated. 
i
n late December 1993, 
the 
 n
ational Political Congress of Black Women (
n
PCBW), which boasted a membership of 
2,500, staged demonstrations in Washington, D.C., against two record retail outlets, 
n
obody 
Beats the Wiz and Sam Goody. The organization was joined in civil disobedience by activ -
ist Dick Gregory and endorsed by the 
n
ational Council of 
n
egro Women, the 
n
AACP , and 
Jesse Jackson’s 
n
ational Rainbow Coalition, among others. Beginning in February 1994, both 
the House and Senate scheduled hearings on gangsta rap. Senator Carol Moseley Braun, an 
African American who chaired the Senate committee, proposed a rating system—the same Tupac Shakur grappled with the contradictions of the gang-
sta lifestyle in his art and in his life. They eventually proved to be his undoing.
 RAP  A n D  META l  357idea abandoned in 1985 as too unwieldy—“to prevent records from getting into the hands of 
children.”118
no rappers were invited to testify at the first round of hearings. But one aspect of these in-
quiries differed significantly from the PMRC investigation. While the (mostly African American) participants who criticized rap did not condone violent or misogynist lyrics, nearly all recognized 
the legitimacy of black rage and placed their comments in the context of societal disintegration. 
“The issue is not whether to spurn, regulate, restrict, segregate, or otherwise curb the distribu-tion of hip hop music,” said David W . Harleston of Rush Associated 
l
abels. “Rather, the issue is 
whether we, as a community and nation, are prepared to address the very issues that have given 
rise to the lyrics that some find so troubling.”119 The question that followed logically was, Why do 
so many fans find offensive rappers appealing? This question suggests a consideration of popular 
music as one variable among the myriad of social forces that affect the quality of life.
After 1994, rap hearings began to subside, only to pick up again two years later with 
the shooting deaths of Tupac Shakur and Biggie Smalls. At the 
time of Shakur’s death in 1996, his fourth album, All Eyez on Me, which debuted at number one, had sold 3 million copies, placing him squarely in the company of top-selling artists. Shakur had built his career steadily, with the release of three previous albums (2paca-lypse Now [1991], Strictly 4 My N.I.G.G.A.Z. [1993], Me Against the World [1995]) and well-received appearances in a number of films (Juice [1992], Poetic Justice  
[1993], Above the Rim [1994]), and with two more films in the can (Gridlock and Gang Related). 
Two years before his death, Shakur had been shot five times during a robbery in 
n
ew York. 
He implied that Biggie Smalls and Sean “Puffy” Combs, the head of Smalls’s label, Bad Boy 
Records, were involved or knew the shooter’s identity, a charge that Smalls and Combs denied. 
The accusation placed the shooting within the age-old East Coast/West Coast rap rivalry; Shakur recorded for 
l
.A.-based Death Row Records, run at that time by Marion “Suge” 
k
night, 
who was widely suspected of having ties to organized crime. 
k
night had publicly insulted 
Combs and Bad Boy at the 1995 Source Awards show in 
n
ew York. For his part, Shakur had 
baited Smalls viciously on “Hit ’Em 
u
p,” on which he claimed to have had sex with Smalls’s es-
tranged wife, Faith Evans. Shakur was shot in 
l
as Vegas while riding in 
k
night’s car. He died 
one week later, on September 13, 1996.
Biggie Smalls, who recorded as the 
n
otorious B.
i
.G., grew up big and tough on the 
streets of Brooklyn, but had a gift for constructing rhymes. 
i
f Shakur displayed a siege men -
tality on Me Against the World, B.
i
.G. foretold his own death on his debut album, Ready to Die  
(1994). After Shakur’s death, Combs tried to end the hostility between Bad Boy and Death Row, as he and Smalls prepared for the release of Smalls’s second album, Life after Death. Both 
felt that Smalls was on the verge of a major breakthrough. Trying to put Shakur’s death be-hind them, Smalls and Combs ventured to 
l
os Angeles (with extra security) in March 1997 to 
present an award to Toni Braxton at the Soul Train Awards . The following night, after leaving 
a party, Smalls was shot dead in his car. As of this writing, the murders of Tupac and Biggie remain cold cases. Combs paid tribute to his friend and protégé on a chart-topping duet with Faith Evans titled “
i
’ll Be Missing You.” 
i
t was a single from his own debut as rapper Puff 
Daddy. Fittingly, he titled the album No Way Out.When James Brown ran afoul of the 
law, no one said funk was to blame. 
Tupac Shakur’s case was no different. 
Such instances cannot be used legiti-
mately to indict a whole genre of music.
358  R o C kin’ ou TAgainst the odds, metal had risen from the embers of a dying 1970s subculture. Rap emerged from 
one of the most dispossessed communities in the country. By the late 1980s, they had become the primary musical expressions of youth culture. Working from the bottom up, these styles seemed to 
thrive on the indifference, even hostility, of the music industry. They engendered fanatical devotion 
among their fans and a ferocious backlash among their detractors. In this sense, these styles were decidedly political, whether they intended to make an overt political statement or not. The intensity of feelings generated by rap and metal resonated with the profound rethinking of American values that characterized the period. As such, these types of music were frequently the targets for govern-ment investigations and the wrath of conservative social organizations. In the 1990s, a new sound that was labeled alternative began competing for national attention among youths. For many, alternative was the fulfillment of the political promise of punk a decade later. Alternative emerged as an intensely personal music with a discordant sound, and its artists initially adopted a doggedly 
anticommercial posture. Paradoxically, the music became wildly successful.
LEARN MORE
Chapter Questions on 
MySearchLab  359
11
The success of rap and metal at the dawn of the 1990s   
reminded many of precisely that aspect of rock ‘n’ roll that had so dis-
tressed the moral guardians of the 1950s: that the music of the most 
disenfranchised—angry blacks and irreverent working-class whites—
could be the most compelling culturally, politically, and economically. 
 
Accordingly, Rolling Stone’s Mikal Gilmore remembered 1990 as “the 
year in which rock & roll was reborn.”1 Something of a postmodern twist to this rebirth be-
came 
 
apparent as the major-market breakthrough of what had been called alternative music 
brought about a further disintegration of the barriers between cult and mass, margin and main-
stream, underground and commercial, and (ultimately) serious art and popular culture. This 
breakthrough followed a decade of development during which an underground of post-punk 
 
alternative sounds brewed in locations as diverse as Athens, Georgia, Minneapolis, 
 
Minnesota, 
and most notably, Seattle, Washington, in which genre boundaries were not always so clear or well defined.
2 Ultimately, even punk itself, refashioned with a new accessibility to accompany 
its abrasiveness, reached mainstream U.S. audiences by the middle of the 1990s as it never 
had before.
That punk and alternative music found such commercial success in these years was argu-
ably a sign that they had been fundamentally altered, losing some of their oppositional edge. 
It was just as much a sign, though, that the popular music mainstream itself was undergoing significant changes in its own right. The breakthrough of alternative was only one of sev-eral that would leave their mark on the subsequent development of the pop market during the 1990s and into the twenty-first century. Another was the rise of a new brand of commercial country music that absorbed some of the dynamics and the spectacle of American rock without becoming a hybrid, as the Southern rock or country rock of the 1970s had been. Artists such as Garth Brooks and Shania Twain set a new standard for country music’s success in the wider LEARN MORE
Learning objectives 
on MySearchLabRepackaging Pop:  
The Changing Mainstream360  rock I n’ o UTarena of pop, paving the way for the later careers of a host of pop country superstars, including 
the Dixie 
c
hicks and Taylor Swift. Wider demographic shifts fostered conditions favorable to a 
boom in the sales of Latin music that extended even to Spanish-language styles like the Puerto 
r
ican–based reggaeton. Female artists during the 1990s and into the 2000s also enjoyed a 
new prominence, and even dominance, in the pop music charts, as public proclamations about 
the “Year of the Woman” gave way to year after year in which women such as Lady Gaga and Adele headed the annual list of top-selling artists.
Then there was rap, the proverbial elephant in the room that the mainstream music in-
dustry could no longer ignore. The deaths of Tupac Shakur and Biggie Smalls in 1996 and 1997, respectively, seemed to signal the end of an era, but if anything, rap’s commercial prog-ress grew even more steadily in their wake. Indeed, the late 1990s and early 2000s were the era of the hip hop mogul, when figures such as Sean “Puff Daddy” 
c
ombs, Percy “Master P” 
Miller, 
c
urtis “50 
c
ent” Jackson, and Shawn “Jay-Z” 
c
arter pursued strategies for converting 
the cultural currency of rap into a multifaceted branding exercise, through which music, mov-
ies, clothing, and even such far-afield products as bottled water were part of a total package. 
Musically, in these years rap went through a process of significant cross-fertilization with rhythm and blues, which was itself infused with hip hop beats and attitude. As rap and r&b exerted greater and greater influence on the larger pop music marketplace, one could rightly wonder whether the era of crossover was on the verge of obsolescence. To a hitherto unexpected degree, black music made  
by black artists no longer needed to cross over—it now resided squarely at the center of American popular taste. At the very 
least, in the 1990s and into the 2000s, hip hop demonstrated that 
 
unlike the rock ‘n’ roll of the 1950s and 1960s; its most widely pop-
ular manifestations would not be put forth with a white face (Eminem being the most promi-
nent exception to this general rule).
Surrounding—and in an important sense framing—these varied incursions into the mu-
sical mainstream was a set of structural changes that affected the music industry as a whole. The major record companies—Polygram, 
c
BS/
c
olumbia, WEA, 
rc
A, M
c
A, and EMI—
had been subject to a series of notable mergers and acquisitions beginning in the mid-1980s, 
through which most of them became incorporated into larger conglomerations that were not exclusively or even primarily oriented toward music production and distribution. As the record industry went through a significant boom period over the course of the 1990s, the trend of corporate mergers only intensified, and the Big Six record labels became the Big Five. By 2003, when the rise of the Internet spurred a downward trend in the industry’s fortunes, the Big Five were reduced to the Big Four; in 2012, the Big Four became the Big Three with the sale of EMI to the Universal Music Group. All the while, major label production efforts became focused on the production of hit records and superstar artists that would best ensure the con-tinued maximization of profits, a tendency that was evident in the wave of teen pop that domi-nated the last years of the 1990s and in the cultivation of high-powered divas such as Whitney Houston, Mariah 
c
arey, and 
c
eline Dion.As rap and r&b exerted greater and 
greater influence on the larger pop 
 
music marketplace, one could rightly 
wonder whether the era of crossover 
was on the verge of obsolescence. To a hitherto unexpected degree, black music made by black artists no longer needed 
to cross over—it now resided squarely at 
the center of American popular taste.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 361Meet the New Boss…Bigger than the Old Boss
As we discussed in c hapter 7, starting as far back as the early 1970s record companies had been 
subject to a form of “merger mania” that was endemic to the corporate business world at large. 
The reasons were basic: by the end of the 1960s, rock and pop had proven themselves to be 
very profitable commodities, and so large corporations whose business was not geared toward 
the music industry thought that buying a successful existing record company was the best way to get a piece of what appeared to be an ever-expanding pie. This pattern continued and even intensified from the mid-1980s forward, spurred by the increasingly globalized nature of the music industry and the larger media industries of which it was a part. The first significant move in the latter-day era of music industry merger mania came in 1986, when the German publishing firm Bertelsmann acquired full ownership of the 
rc
A record company, which at the 
time included the labels 
rc
A, Arista, Ariola, and Hansa labels and was the third largest record 
company in the world.3 Following quickly on the heels of the deal came Japanese electronics 
giant Sony’s 1988 acquisition of 
c
BS, then the world’s largest record company, for a price 
 
estimated at $2 billion. By the time another Japanese electronics corporation, 
 
Matsushita, paid 
the princely sum of $6.6 billion to acquire the music holdings of the M
c
A record company in 
1990, only one of the major U.S. record companies remained under U.S. ownership. However, even that company—Warner Music—was subject to the larger trend toward conglomeration, becoming subsumed by the merger of the Time and Warner 
c
ommunications corporations 
in 1989.
At the dawn of the 1990s, then, a new set of corporate play-
ers controlled the record industry, and the major record companies were encased within expanding economic empires that cut across multiple media and financial sectors. Yet the biggest company to 
rule the market was yet to come. In 1995, Edgar Bronfman, Jr., an aspiring songwriter who was chairman of the 
c
anadian Seagram 
c
o., one of the world’s largest alcohol distilleries, led his company 
to purchase M
c
A from Matshushita for $5.7 billion. Three years later, in 1998, Bronfman 
went after Polygram, adding it to the company’s holdings and combining it with M
c
A to form 
the Universal Music Group. At the time, Polygram had ascended to being the world’s largest music corporation through a series of deals that had included the purchase of A&M and Def Jam.
4 The combined assets of M c A and Polygram thus created something of a music mega-  
corporation, the global reach of which was made all the wider when Seagram was purchased in 
2000 by the French media company Vivendi.
Writing in 1989, when the Time-Warner merger deal was still pending, Steve Lohr ex-
amined the motives behind such maneuvers in the New York Times. In an era of increasing 
global circulation of media, companies sought diversification of product as well as the ability to reach an expanded international audience; as industry consultant Sharon Patrick explained, “The name of the game is spreading the high fixed costs over as broad a natural audience as possible.”
5 They also desired to minimize the risks involved in a business that was built upon 
gambling for success against the likelihood of failure. Pursuing these objectives, the new media 
At the dawn of the 1990s, then, a new 
set of corporate players controlled the 
record industry, and the major record 
companies were encased within expand-
ing economic empires that cut across multiple media and financial sectors.
362  rock I n’ o UTconglomerates followed an established, culturally unappealing logic: that a single artist who can 
sell 40 million units—as Michael Jackson did with Thriller—is worth more than forty acts who can sell 1 million units apiece. Such an artist saves the costs of mounting forty different market-
ing campaigns. By design, then, the major record companies promoted as few artists as possible. 
As Anthony De
c
urtis observed in 1992, “Instead of investing in and nurturing a wide range of 
new talents, record companies are betting wildly like drunks at the roulette table, hoping that one big score—whether by an old favorite or a new lucky number—will cover all past debts.”
6
Major Labels and Monster Contracts
In the 1990s, the artist that the music industry promoted to the greatest economic advantage 
was Mariah 
c
arey, who combined incredible talent with the best business plan on the planet. 
With her multi-octave range and good pop/dance/r&b material, 
c
arey was paired with top-
notch professionals and approached by 
c
olumbia as a major investment from day one. “We 
don’t look at Mariah 
c
arey as a dance-pop artist,” said 
c
olumbia executive Don Ienner. “We 
look at her as a franchise.”7 (columbia must have regarded her subsequent marriage to label 
head Tommy Mottola as a corporate merger.) From very early on, one got the impression of an enormous talent following a calculated program of career development—from her MTV 
Unplugged  appearance , which yielded a number one cover of the Jackson 5’s “I’ll Be There,” to 
her “ All I Want for 
c
hristmas Is You,” which hit the pop charts for the 1994, 1995, and 1996 
holiday seasons.
c
arey’s 1990 eponymous debut album rolled out four number one singles in a row. Two 
of them, “Vision of Love” and “Love Takes Time,” hit number one in three markets—pop, adult 
contemporary, and r&b. Indeed, every 
c
arey album of the decade was launched with a single 
that went to number one. Meanwhile, her racial makeup—her mother is a white 
n
ew York 
opera singer and her father is a black Venezuelan—received as much press as her music in her early 
career, and formed the backdrop to her consistent ability to move between r&b and more straight-ahead pop ballad material. Her final album of the decade, Rainbow (1999), followed her split with 
Mottola, and continued her move toward hip hop and r&b with guest shots by Jay-Z, Snoop Dogg, Da Brat, and Missy Elliott, without losing one iota of her pop appeal.HEAR MORE
Mariah Carey on 
MySearchLab
Mariah Carey was considered a hot property at Columbia from the 
moment she was signed. She lived up to expectations when her multiplatinum self-titled debut album brought her the Best New 
Artist and Best Pop Vocal Performance, Female awards, at the 
Grammys in 1990.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 363As the new millennium began, Mariah c arey had recorded 
more number one singles than any other female artist in any 
genre—including at least one in every year of her debut decade—
and she had sold an incredible 105 million units in under ten years. 
Given this kind of success, it is perhaps not all that surprising that the major labels stuck to their superstar marketing strategies, po-nying up millions for contracts in the 1990s that were surely un-precedented, and perhaps unrecoverable.
Janet Jackson initiated the 1990s round of high-stakes contracts when she switched from 
A&M to Virgin in 1991. With two number one albums and one tour to her credit, she scored a reported $50 million deal that 
r
ichard Branson, chairman of Virgin 
r
ecords, compared to buy-
ing a 
r
embrandt.8 In the same year, Aerosmith returned to c olumbia with a new deal worth 
upward of $30 million. In 1991, Mötley 
c
rüe re-signed with Elektra for $25 million to be paid 
over four albums. ZZ Top scored $30 million at 
rc
A. The 
r
olling Stones landed a $40 million 
three-album deal with Virgin. Even these contracts paled in comparison with those offered to Madonna, Michael Jackson, and Prince, reportedly each worth over $60 million. The frenzied bidding peaked in August 1996 when 
r
.E.M., of all groups, scored an $80 million five-album 
deal with Warner—the largest contract in record-company history.
These artists and their handlers were cashing in on the outlandish sums of money that 
had changed hands in the wave of recent mergers. “When you hear that your record company has been sold for 20 or 30 times its earnings,” said Tim 
c
ollins, Aerosmith’s manager, “you 
think, ‘I want a piece of that.’”9 The incredible amounts of money involved in these deals led 
artists to become more aware of their key role in companies’ overall profitability, and a new un-
derstanding of the value of catalogue sales simply added to the performers’ growing realization 
of their own worth. Back catalogue had always been valuable because an artist’s hit records 
generally boost sales of his or her earlier recordings. With the advent of the compact disc, back catalogue became even more important because consumers began buying 
c
Ds of recordings 
they already owned. In the early 1990s, back catalogue sales were estimated to be as much as 40 percent of all album sales. 
n
ot coincidentally, overall sales soared during this same period, 
with international sales of compact discs rising from 997.5 million in 1991 to nearly 2 billion by 1995, a full one hundred percent increase in just four years.
10
The industry’s superstar strategy came to appear flawed, though, as many multiplat -
inum artists turned out products that fell far short of record-company expectations. In the 
early 1990s, new releases by Madonna and Prince (now called “the artist formerly known as 
Prince” or simply “the Artist”) rose and fell on the charts as never before. Prince sustained him-
self with three greatest-hits packages; Madonna, with a $50 “art” book—Sex —of suggestive 
 
photographs of herself. To a certain extent disappointing sales were offset by the use of back catalogue items to link groups and songs with films and/or products. Advertising proved to be very lucrative with the Beatles selling sneakers, Elton John crooning for Sassoon, and 
 
Madonna 
shilling for Pepsi. By the mid-1990s, record companies operating in a changing 
 
media environ-
ment thought of themselves more as exploiters of rights than as producers of records. Their new mission was to develop as many revenue streams as possible.As the new millennium began, Mariah 
Carey had recorded more number one 
singles than any other female artist in 
any genre—including at least one in 
 
every year of her debut decade—and 
she had sold an incredible 105 million units in under ten years.
364  rock I n’ o UTnonetheless, they were not able to keep growing indefinitely. In his 1996 front-page, 
year-end wrap-up for the New York Times, 
n
eil Strauss noted that “[g]rowth in the $12 billion 
[U.S.] record industry, which for more than a decade has ranged from 12 to 20 percent annu-
ally, has slowed to a virtual standstill.”11 Strauss and others offered various explanations for 
the phenomenon: record companies’ pursuit of singles rather than development of long-term 
careers; the industry’s focus on new technologies instead of on the music; a natural decline in 
catalogue sales as baby boomers completed the replacement of their LPs; the industry’s failure 
to recognize the potential of urban music; and the industry’s typical reliance on a handful of superstars. Although fortunes would revive somewhat during the last years of the 1990s, the rate of growth remained far below what it had been in the early part of the decade, and would lose even more ground once the Internet arose as a primary medium for music consumption and distribution, a development to be detailed at length in 
c
hapter 12.
Teen Pop: Boy Bands and Teen Queens
What temporarily revived the industry’s fortunes at the end of the 1990s was teen pop, repre -
sented by artists such as the Backstreet Boys, ’
n
 Sync, Britney Spears, and 
c
hristina Aguilera. 
Built upon a striking combination of innocence and sexuality that was, in some ways, a throw-
back to early-1960s pent-up sexuality—a preoccupation with titillation, as in the beach party movies—teen pop appeared the antithesis of the antisocial currents that would run through alter-native music or the tales of transgression that drove the commer-cial rise of rap. In retrospect it can be seen as the last triumphant gasp of the enlarged, multinational industry that had taken shape throughout the 1990s before the Internet changed the game. At the height of what journalist Steve 
k
nopper called the “teen pop 
bubble” in 1999, industry sales reached record levels, with U.S. 
revenue of $14.6 billion and international sales of 2.385 billion compact discs.
12
There was a certain incestuousness about the new teen pop infrastructure and a shared 
ethic among the most successful artists about their role as teen idols. Britney Spears and 
 c
hristina Aguilera, as well as ’
n
 Sync’s Justin Timberlake and J
c
 
c
hasez, were members of 
the Mickey Mouse Club class of 1993. Both the Backstreet Boys (BSB) and ’
n
 Sync shared man-
agement with Lou Pearlman’s 
c
ontinental Management 
c
ompany. BSB became disillusioned 
when Pearlman created ’
n
 Sync without telling them, then sued for back royalties. ’
n
 Sync 
also left over money issues; they joined Johnny Wright’s Wright Stuff management company, 
which started with the 
n
ew 
k
ids on the Block and moved on to Britney Spears. ’
n
 Sync then 
left 
rc
A for Jive 
r
ecords, home to both Britney Spears and the Backstreet Boys (a move that 
precipitated Jive’s sale to BMG, 
rc
A’s parent company); and all three acts have worked with 
the crack writer-producer team headed by the late Denniz Pop and his protégé Max 
 
Martin 
at Sweden’s 
c
heiron Studios. Auditions for Star Search and a Southern Baptist upbringing 
were themes that run through many of these artists’ backgrounds. An intense work ethic and 
rigorous sense of discipline characterized all the successful careers; the result was a curious Built upon a striking combination of 
innocence and sexuality that was, in 
some ways, a throwback to early-1960s 
pent-up sexuality—a preoccupation with 
titillation, as in the beach party mov-ies—teen pop appeared the antithesis of the antisocial currents that would 
run through alternative music or the 
tales of transgression that drove the commercial rise of rap.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 365combination of youthful energy and seasoned professionalism, accompanied by an acute sense 
of their responsibilities as role models to a generation.
Dating back to Sonny and 
c
her, the Partridge Family, the Jackson 5, and the 
n
ew 
k
ids 
on the Block, there was nothing particularly new about the teen pop phenomenon. From the 
mall tours of Tiffany and the more self-assured, r&b-flavored pop of Debbie Gibson to the “girl power” feminism of the Spice Girls and 
n
o Doubt, there has been a market for this music. 
The difference at the end of the twentieth century was just how systematic and all-pervasive it seemed to be. In addition to those boy bands and teen queens already mentioned, one found the funkier 98 Degrees, LF
o
, Mandy (Moore), Jessica Simpson, and the well-respected Hanson. 
Monica and Brandy, and Destiny’s 
c
hild were among the few African American acts who could 
be considered part of the phenomenon.
Like the record industry as a whole, teen pop peaked in 1999. That year, three of the four 
best-selling albums were Millennium (Backstreet Boys) at number one, …Baby One More Time  
(Britney Spears) at number two, and ’N Sync in the number four slot, with 
c
hristina Aguilera 
edging into the Top Forty with her self-titled debut. The year 2000 showed a slight shift, with 
’
n
 Sync taking over the top slot and Spears’s Oops!...I Did It Again  and Aguilera’s debut in the 
Top Ten. By this time, the Backstreet Boys had slipped due to contractual problems.
The Backstreet Boys, the oldest of the new boy bands, had been around since 1993. 
Signed by Jive in 1994, they became major hit-makers in Europe, though it wasn’t until 1997 that they made it in the United States. That year, a self-titled compilation of their European hits plus some new material—including “Quit Playing Games (with My Heart),” “ As Long As You Love Me,” “Everybody (Backstreet’s Back)”—took the United States by storm, eventu -
ally selling 13 million copies. Their follow-up album, Millennium (1999), broke Garth Brooks’s 
first-week sales record, toting up 1.1 million units. The tour supporting the album sold out all 
53 dates (765,000 tickets) in one day. Together, Backstreet Boys and Millennium racked up some 
60 million copies in worldwide sales. BSB eventually left Pearlman, but stayed with Jive, re -
portedly signing a $60 million five-album deal.
From the start, BSB felt threatened by ’
n
 Sync. They were angry with Pearlman for 
developing the group and were particularly upset when ’
n
 Sync’s sophomore effort, No Strings 
Attached (on Jive), sold 2.4 million copies, more than doubling BSB’s first-week sales record. With so many similarities to the Backstreet Boys—five clean-cut twenty-somethings from 
o
rlando recording very highly produced pop singles and schooled by the same handlers—
’
n
 Sync distinguished themselves as somewhat edgier and more savvy. They hit pay dirt with 
their very first (self-titled) album, which sold more than eleven times platinum and remained on the charts over two years, generating the hit singles “Tearin’ Up My Heart,” “Here We Go,” and “I Want You Back.” They also recorded duets with the likes of Alabama and Gloria Estefan, and performed a duet with Puerto 
r
ico’s Son By Four at the first-ever Latin Grammy 
Awards show—thereby disseminating their music to new audiences.
Rolling Stone’s Anthony Bozza wrote, “
 
‘
n
 Sync seem no different from Backstreet…but 
they are….’
n
 Sync tap into some of the same teen angst and psychosexual anxiety at the heart 
of much darker stuff, like teen horror movies and grunge.”13 The group’s third outing, Celebrity,  
further highlighted their distinctness from the boy band pack. Still tethered to 
c
heiron’s  
pop base, the group ventured much farther afield, using noted hip hop production team the 366  rock I n’ o UTneptunes to produce “Girlfriend” and techno producer BT to produce “Pop” over “Max Head -
room-style frackle-stutter edits” of Timberlake beatboxing.14 At the end of 2001, the album 
had been certified five times platinum and was still on the charts. Together, ’
n
 Sync and the 
Backstreet Boys peaked when they placed second and third among the top-grossing live acts 
worldwide, taking in $90.2 million and $89.8 million, respectively, for their 2001 tours.
Britney Spears burst onto the charts in late 1998 and took the music to new heights over 
the next two years. As 2000 came to a close, her first album, ... Baby One More Time, had been 
certified thirteen times platinum and was still riding the charts, and her second, Oops!...I Did It Again, was at number five and climbing, eventually selling 9 million units. The title songs from both albums, like her stage act, were loaded with sexual innuendo. The fact that the first al-bum’s hook line was prefaced with “hit me” raised concerns about female masochism, a charge that Spears shrugged off. “It doesn’t mean physically hit me,” she told Steven Daly. “It means just give me a sign.”
15 Spears made her stage debut at age five. Later signed to Jive records, 
every aspect of her career was mapped out and Spears was a full collaborator, calling many of 
the shots. As her co-manager Larry 
r
udolph explained, “She knows exactly what her audience 
wants. She is her audience.”16
Spears sought to project a more grown-up image for her third album and brought in the 
n
eptunes to produce the single “I’m a Slave 4 U.” 
r
eleased in late 2001, Britney became her 
third album in a row to debut at number one. By this time, she was dating Justin Timberlake, 
and the media attention lavished on their (short-lived) romance added to the celebrity status 
of both. During this period, she also landed a lucrative Pepsi endorsement. But Britney sold The oldest of the new boy bands, the Backstreet Boys became a major teen sensation but kept 
looking over their shoulders as ’N Sync gained on them.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 367below expectations (around 4 million copies) and none of its 
singles broke into the Top Ten, even with the steamy video for “I’m a Slave 4 U.” Spears decided to take a much-needed sab-
batical after an onstage meltdown on the final day of her 2002 
world tour.
c
hristina Aguilera drew frequent comparisons to Britney 
Spears, her fellow former Mouseketeer, but her vocal range and power were more akin to Whitney Houston and Mariah 
c
arey. 
Aguilera beat both Britney Spears and Macy Gray for the Best 
n
ew Artist Grammy in 2000—an upset victory all the more 
incredible because 
rc
A had reined her in, keeping the album well 
within teen pop conventions. Her 1999 eponymous debut entered 
the charts at number one and sold better than 8 million copies be-fore it peaked. Its first single, “Genie in a Bottle,” whose infectious hook line propelled it straight to number one, became the most popular single of the year. It was the perfect metaphor for the state of her career and the bottled-up teenage sexuality that typified so much of the music. Born of a white mother and an Ecuadorian father, Aguilera is part Latina, a side of her identity she 
 
decided to explore in more depth. As 2000 came to an end, she had three albums in the 
 
Billboard 200: Christina Aguilera at number twenty-six and climbing fast; My Kind of Christmas, 
her holiday entry; and Mi Reflejo (My 
r
eflection), the Spanish version of her debut album. And 
she hadn’t yet recorded what the press was calling her sophomore album.
Aguilera took two years to complete her second studio album, Stripped. During this 
period, she came of age in a most extroverted fashion, bragging to one interviewer that her 
genital piercings had “gotten a lot of compliments,” to which she quickly added: “From my gy-necologist.”
17 Aguilera was certainly entitled to celebrate her newfound adult sexuality, but on 
Stripped , as in real life, she seemed overwhelmed by it, compelled to flaunt it, unable to place it 
in any kind of perspective. Her Linda Perry collaboration, “Beautiful,” broke into the Top Ten, 
and although Stripped quickly rose to number two on the charts, it failed to generate sales even 
approaching those of her debut.
In the time it took Aguilera to record her second album, the teen pop space in popular 
culture was already being taken over by a generation of somewhat more serious, less overtly 
sexual female artists ranging from 
n
orah Jones and Vanessa 
c
arlton to Avril Lavigne and 
Pink. However, as one group of teen pop stars struggled to grow up in the spotlight—Justin 
Timberlake emerging as the one star of the era who transitioned to his post-teen pop career without a hitch—others would come of age. Ten years later, Justin Bieber would retool teen pop for a new moment of resurgence. But that is a story for another chapter.Christina Aguilera drew frequent com-
parisons to Britney Spears, her 
 
fellow 
former Mouseketeer, but her vocal 
range and power were more akin to 
Whitney Houston and Mariah Carey.
Britney Spears combined sexual innuendo, disciplined profes-
sionalism, and a strong business plan into one of the most successful careers in teen pop, then spiraled out of control.
368  rock I n’ o UTListening Guide 32Britney Spears’s appeal is not only aural but strongly visual as well—  
presented, like Britney’s role model, Madonna, in the company of impec-
cable choreographies and virtuosic dance montage. Britney’s early song 
hits were simple, repetitive, written by others, and essentially conceived as 
vehicles for carefully staged theater. Whether innocent or salacious, soulful or funky, Britney’s hits reflected the industry’s emphasis on marketing ele-ments over artistic individuality. Some may question the artistic credibility 
of this approach; however, Britney’s powerful, sultry, and amazingly flexible 
voice still shines through any amount of glitz and hype.
Musical Style Notes
While 1960s producer Phil Spector had to fill the studio with live performing bodies to get his famous “wall of sound,” 
today’s producers (in this case, Max Martin and Rami) can get an incredibly thick instrumental and vocal texture with a few live musicians, a recording studio, and a computer. Other than the acoustic and electric guitar and bass, all the other 
instrumental sounds on the CD ...Baby One More Time (drums, multiple keyboards) are created by synth programming. 
There is also a lot of electronic processing done on the vocals, in terms of both doubling parts and manipulating the actual vocal sound with compression, reverb, and other effects. Armed with this technology and an artist with Spears’s strong and remarkably fluid natural voice, the sky’s the limit in creating vocal effects.
Structurally, “...Baby One More Time” has a verse-chorus form; the verse has two distinctly different melodic 
sections (indicated in the Musical “Road Map” as the A and B sections of the verse). The chorus is memorable—one of those refrains that runs through your mind for the rest of the day—culminating with the memorable “Hit me baby one more time” hook.
An interesting variation happens at 2:05 in the piece, where new musical material is introduced into the verse. 
Then at 3:07, the new material is interwoven with the chorus, creating the effect of a call and response between groups of vocalists (some of them overdubbed).
Musical “Road Map”
Timings Commen T s
0:00 Introduction, prominent piano sound, steady drumbeat, guitar with wah wah effect also heard in 
background.
0:12 Verse 1 (A section of verse)
Note
0:32 (B section of verse)Background vocals added.
0:43 ChorusMultiple vocals
1:04 Verse 2 (A section of verse)Solo voice with background vocals added as verse progresses.
1:24 (B section of verse)
1:35 Chorus
Multiple vocals
1:55 Reprise of introduction material“. . . Baby One More Time”
Artist:
 
Britney Spears
Music/Lyrics by Max Martin
Label:
 
Jive, from the CD 
...Baby One More Time  (1998) rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 369
Listening Guide 32Timings Commen T s
2:05 New Verse 1, altered and expanded with musical material from the chorus.
This verse begins like the others, but the second line is missing. At the fourth line (“I must con-
fess”), a new melody is heard, with more background vocals, bringing an entirely new musical ele-
ment into the song. The end of the variation picks up the last 4 bars of the chorus, with the last line “hit me baby one more time.”
2:47 Chorus
Multiple vocals
3:07 Chorus repeats.Here the musical material of the chorus (overdubbed, multitracked vocals, including Britney’s) is 
interwoven with the musical material from the altered verse/chorus heard at 2:05 (Britney and multitracked background vocals).
Last line: Instrumental track drops out; “hit me baby one more time” is sung a cappella, and 
then the final chord is struck.370  rock I n’ o UTSoundScan: Remapping the Charts
Underlying the record industry’s (mostly) rising fortunes during the 1990s was another shift, 
mainly noticed by industry insiders but with broad-ranging consequences. Starting on May 25, 1991, Billboard magazine began relying on a new method for tracking the sales information 
that it used to compile its charts. 
c
reated by a research firm based in Hartsdale, 
n
ew York, 
SoundScan used statistics drawn from the scanning of bar codes at the point of sale (P
o
S) to 
tabulate data about best-selling releases. This marked a departure from Billboard ’s established 
method of compiling chart data, which had relied upon retailers providing reports via phone or 
messenger (or later, fax).18
The new information offered by SoundScan gave a more accurate reflection of record 
sales than that derived from the old methodology. It also had an impact on the music that ap-
peared at the top of the charts. Major label pop artists suddenly 
found themselves losing ground as artists from less squarely main-
stream genres took up space at the top of the charts. Just two weeks after the new chart debuted, 
n
.W .A. reached the number two po-
sition on the Top Pop Albums chart with its album Efil4Zaggin, a hard-edged, misogynistic gangster rap record issued by the in-
dependent label Priority 
r
ecords. The following week, June 15, the album went to number 
one (even though it only stood at number twenty-one on the magazine’s top r&b album chart, which still relied on the older way of tallying sales).
19 In September, Garth Brooks’ third al -
bum, Ropin’ the Wind, became the first-ever country album to enter the charts at number one.
And, in the second week of January 1992, 
n
irvana’s album Nevermind unseated Michael 
Jackson’s newest release, Bad, to become the number one album in the U.S., certifying that “al-ternative” music had become a major force in the larger pop marketplace.
From Indie Scenes to Alternative Nation
Summing up the year in alternative music in 1992, Rolling Stone writer k im n eely offered a 
diatribe that would have seemed more at home in an underground fanzine than popular mu-
sic’s main mass-market publication. Before 1992, 
n
eely complained, “alternative didn’t connote 
a sound so much as an aesthetic” rooted in the DIY efforts of early 1980s hardcore bands like 
Black Flag and the Dead 
k
ennedys.20 It existed to satisfy listeners who were bored with the 
more widely popular rock options then available, those who preferred Jane’s Addiction to Guns 
n’ 
r
oses, the 
r
ed Hot 
c
hili Peppers to Metallica. By 1990, major labels started paying more 
 
attention to those very artists who had previously gone against the commercial grain. Accord-
ing to 
n
eely, “they co-opted the tag alternative as a sales tool and began selling individuality 
to legions of mainstream fans eager to create identities for themselves. By 1991, alternative was the mainstream.”
21 The proof lay in the way that a set of interrelated  buzzwords—  Seattle, 
grunge, and alternative—became increasingly inescapable over the course of 1992, as 
 n
irvana’s 
break-out success was compounded by the rising fortunes of several other Seattle bands 
 
including Pearl Jam, Soundgarden, and Alice in 
c
hains. Left in their wake was a sizable minor-
ity of music fans who felt abandoned as their chosen music no longer seemed so uniquely and 
Major label pop artists suddenly found 
themselves losing ground as artists 
from less squarely mainstream genres 
took up space at the top of the charts.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 371secretly theirs—among whom might 
have been numbered 
n
irvana’s own 
lead figure, 
k
urt 
c
obain, who appeared 
on the cover of Rolling Stone’s April 
16, 1992, issue wearing a t-shirt that read, in apparently handwritten scrawl, 
 
“
c
orporate Magazines Still Suck.”
n
eely’s article was one of many 
published in the early 1990s that won-
dered aloud at the paradox of alterna-tive music’s commercial rise. Although she observed the connections between 
nineties alternative and that of the pre-ceding decade, like most commentators she lost sight of the bigger picture. While the mainstream music industry can control the marketplace economi-cally, it cannot determine the meaning of the music. For all the saccharine teen pop that clogged the airwaves, it was still possible for the targeted polemics of 
r
age Against the 
 
Machine to sell 
platinum. An established rocker like Bruce Springsteen could still shake up the status quo with “ American Skin (41 Shots),” about the murder of Haitian immigrant Amadou Diallo. 
c
ontent 
to focus on developing new revenue streams, the major record companies had long since dis-tanced themselves from the creative process. As a result, popular musicians enjoyed more au-
tonomy than most other popular artists. The failure to understand this fact is at the heart of 
our inability to grasp the contradictions inherent in the notion of alternative music. The idea that music can retain its integrity only before it reaches a mass public leads to the tendency to lionize artists when they are least successful and to dismiss them precisely at the moment of their greatest impact.
A culture war of sorts has been going on since rock ‘n’ roll appeared, to which the music 
industry has responded differently at different times. In the 1950s, the majors generally aligned themselves with the more conservative elements of society in resisting rock ‘n’ roll. The writ-ers, performers, deejays, and independent record companies that produced and disseminated the music challenged the industry’s established powers and emerged victorious. From the mid-1960s on, the majors realized that independent labels were key to the industry’s future success With the release of Nevermind, Nirvana  
introduced alternative to the mainstream  with a vengeance. While the band seemed  
happy with its newfound success, the late  
Kurt Cobain (front) found the pressures  unbearable and eventually took his own life.
372  rock I n’ o UTand began to rely on them for research and development. Most inde-
pendent labels ferreted out niches of unsated consumer demand and/or test-marketed new musical forms; the majors then bought them 
outright, distributed their products, or signed their most successful 
artists. This was the pattern with punk and disco (1970s) and with rap and metal (1980s). The only things that changed in the 1990s were the speed and efficiency with which the mainstream music industry was able to incorporate new trends.
In the 1980s, the music usually labeled alternative had its roots in the punk movements of the 
1970s and their 1980s post-punk (as opposed to new wave) variants. However, the label was ap -
plied in one way for African American artists and in another for white artists. The fact that African American artists as diverse as the metallic Living 
c
olour, the folk-oriented Tracy 
c
hapman, blues 
musician 
r
obert 
c
ray, and soul singer Terence Trent D’Arby were labeled alternative speaks more 
to race-based marketing strategies than to a shared aesthetic. 
 c
hapman outgrew the confines of 
the label when her self-titled debut LP went to number one on the pop charts, but as a black 
female acoustic folk singer, she was still in a class by herself. Her search for a musical home led her to headliner status on the Amnesty International tours and eventually to Farm Aid V , where she shared the stage with Living 
c
olour’s Vernon 
r
eid. In 1991, 
r
eid and his group, still falling 
through the cracks of conventional marketing categories, joined the first Lollapalooza tour, adding breadth to the alternative music festival. When 
 
Living 
c
olour previewed their 1992 lineup, with 
Doug Wimbish on bass, they chose the legendary 
n
ew York punk club 
c
BGB to do so.
White alternative groups, though also sounding different from one another, derived from 
a more coherent lineage alluded to by 
n
eely, including the Dead 
k
ennedys from San Francisco; 
Fugazi from Washington, D.
c
.; 
r
.E.M. from Athens, Georgia; and Southern 
c
alifornia’s SST 
label, which expanded from its hardcore roots to include groups as disparate as the Minutemen 
from Los Angeles; Sonic Youth from 
n
ew York; Dinosaur, Jr., from Amherst, Massachusetts; 
and Hüsker Dü from Minneapolis, Minnesota. 
o
f these bands, 
r
.E.M. made the most substan-
tial move from small-scale indie success to major label stardom. Formed in Athens, Georgia, in 1980 as a jangly, inaccessible folk rock unit, 
r
.E.M.’s first several albums—including full-
length debut Murmur (1983), which Rolling Stone selected as album of the year over Michael 
Jackson’s Thriller—were issued on the independent I
r
S label. In 1987, Document became their 
first million-seller; Green, their 1988 major label debut, occasioned their first arena-level tour; Out of Time (1991), their first number one album, joined Nevermind as one of the releases that forced major labels to take alternative acts more seriously.
Along with such cities as Minneapolis and Austin, Texas, 
r
.E.M.’s hometown of 
 
Athens 
established the viability of regional alternative scenes in a manner that was evocatively captured by Bay Area rock critic Gina Arnold, who recalled her emerging sensibility as an 
 
“ Amerindie 
devotee,” hosting a radio show with a friend:
Midwest and South, the Northeast and Texas, portions of the country we’d never thought about in 
our California cloud, took on all this significance in our poor little geographically deprived brains. No longer did we long to go to Paris or Tahiti; instead we pined for Athens and Minneapolis and Boston, creating in our minds’ eyes a new America where every small town contained exactly four cool people and one large garage.
22HEAR MORE
R.E.M. on 
MySearchLabThe idea that music can retain its 
 
integrity only before it reaches a mass 
public leads to the tendency to lionize 
artists when they are least successful 
and to dismiss them precisely at the moment of their greatest impact.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 373Gradually, this patchwork of local scenes became a network of small-scale music ven-
ues, college radio stations, and independent record labels that helped to sustain the indie rock 
underground throughout a period when pop was ruled by Michael Jackson, Madonna, Prince, 
Bruce Springsteen, and Def Leppard. As this network grew, some of the bands that traveled its 
circuits began to draw more notice from major labels; but some indie labels also saw an oppor-tunity to turn something small into something big, something local into something national, if not global, in its appeal. Enter Seattle, and Sub Pop.
Seattle: From Sub Pop to Superstars
Seattle had earlier spawned the fathers of guitar-based instrumental rock ‘n’ roll, the  Ventures, 
a host of rave-up sixties garage bands like the Wailers and the Sonics, and the greatest psyche-
delic guitarist of them all, Jimi Hendrix.23 In fact, Seattle had had a thriving alternative scene 
for years. At its center was the Sub Pop label, founded by Bruce Pavitt and Jon 
 
Poneman.  Sub 
Pop began as an outgrowth of Pavitt’s activities as a college radio deejay and fanzine pub-
lisher in 
o
lympia, Washington, where he was a student at Evergreen 
c
ollege, a hotbed of 
independent cultural activity. In 1983, Pavitt moved to Seattle and began writing a column for 
the city’s alternative music newspaper, The Rocket, with the name “Sub Pop USA.” Immersing himself in the Seattle music scene, he eventually met Poneman, a deejay at the University of Washington radio station 
kc
MU who also booked shows at the 
r
ainbow Tavern, a club near 
the university.
Joining forces, the two showed themselves to have considerable media savvy from the 
start. 
o
ne of their early releases, Sub Pop 200 showcased their ambition, consisting of three 
twelve-inch extended play vinyl records compiling music by twenty 
bands from in or around Seattle, some of established reputation (Soundgarden, Green 
r
iver, Screaming Trees, the Fastbacks) and 
some decidedly more obscure (
c
at Butt, Swallow, and a then barely 
known 
n
irvana). Produced by area musician Jack Endino, who 
would become a veritable house producer for the label, and with an elaborate booklet full of original photography by local artist 
c
harles Peterson, Sub Pop 200 demonstrated Pavitt and Poneman’s 
concerted effort to put together a total package in which image and sound were tethered to a vivid mythology concerning the Seattle scene as a unique creative laboratory all but untouched by mainstream pop values.
24 When they announced their plans for “world domination,” it was 
with tongue firmly in cheek—but it was also a statement of intent.
For all its notoriety, Sub Pop did not exist in a vacuum in Seattle. The city had other 
independent labels such as 
c
/Z, radio stations 
kc
MU and 
k
JET that gave key support to 
local bands, and an alternative press that included the aforementioned Rocket and its shorter-
lived competitors, Backfire and Backlash. 
n
irvana was also not the first artist to find wider 
success out of the growing scene. The Seattle gold rush actually began with the signing of 
Soundgarden to A&M in 1988. Soundgarden had contributed three tracks to a 1986 compila-
tion album released by 
c
/Z called Deep Six, which prefigured Sub Pop 200 in announcing the 
Seattle scene to the outside world. Soundgarden’s first EP release, Screaming Life (1987), was Sub Pop 200 demonstrated Pavitt 
and Poneman’s concerted effort to put 
together a total package in which im-
age and sound were tethered to a vivid 
mythology concerning the Seattle scene as a unique creative laboratory all but untouched by mainstream pop values.
374  rock I n’ o UTListening Guide 33The debut album of the power trio Nirvana, led by the intelligent, talented, 
and unhapp. 24-year-old Kurt Cobain, established grunge as a popular 
style. Nirvana’s 1991 disc Nevermind, chock-full of dark, angry, powerful, 
and hook-ridden rock anthems, garnered extensive critical acclaim. The 
album’s hit single “Smells Like Teen Spirit” reached the Top Ten, and in some cases the number one position, internationally.
In contrast to some of the poseurs who throughout rock’s history 
had made a profession of portraying the anguished artist, Cobain was both 
truly brilliant and truly tormented, and the wave of angst, rage, and despair 
unleashed in his lyrics gained him a reputation as spokesperson for Generation X, a title he regarded with ambivalence. Chronically depressed and a heroin addict, Cobain ended his life in 1994.
Musical Style Notes
Nirvana’s instrumentation falls into the category of power trio—guitar (Kurt Cobain), bass (Krist Noveselic), and drums 
(Dave Grohl)—a combination that has a long history in the world of rock ‘n’ roll, although it was used in different ways. For power trios like the Jimi Hendrix Experience, it was all about the virtuoso lead guitarist; for others, the guitar was pri-
marily employed as a rhythm instrument, while the bass laid down structurally simple but prominent lines, and the drums 
were the “star” attraction that filled the extensive available sonic space. Like the Who’s Keith Moon or Led Zeppelin’s John Bonham, Dave Grohl’s drums are the instrumental power engine driving Nirvana’s guitar riff–based songs.
“Smells Like Teen Spirit,” though perceived at the time as a new alternative musical phenomenon, is in many 
ways a classic pop single, with a fantastic guitar hook, simple repeated chord progression, and cathartic shout-along chorus. The song’s signature succession of chords is in a dark, minor key, and functions somewhat outside the normal harmonic expectations of rock ‘n’ roll (for those who have studied music theory, the chord progression is I, IV , III, VI ).
Structurally, the song has a verse-chorus form, but the verse has two parts: an A section that features new lyrics 
each time and a B section with the same hypnotic, repetitious “hello” lyric each time. The chorus continues the technique of repetition but moves from hypnotic to a litany of rage and despair. This combination of introspective, atmospheric, soft verse and hard, screaming chorus is a strong stylistic marker of grunge rock.
Musical “Road Map”
Timings Commen T s
0:00–0:25 Introduction: electric guitar begins with the song’s signature chord progression.
Drums enter at 0:07.Other instruments join at 0:09, including guitar, now playing with distortion.
0:25–0:34 Introduction ends with reduced volume, transition to verse.
0:34–0:50 Verse 1
0:50–1:06 B section, which provides transition from the verse to the chorus.
1:06–1:31 ChorusNote the change in energy and sonic texture—harder rock sound, screaming vocals.
1:31–1:47 Instrumental transition to Verse 2
1:47–2:04 Verse 2
2:04–2:20 B section
2:20–2:45 Chorus“Smells Like Teen Spirit”
Artist:
 
Nirvana
Music/Lyrics by Kurt Cobain,  
Dave Grohl, Krist Noveselic
Label:
 
DGC, from the CD 
Nevermind  (1991) rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 375Timings Commen T s
3:33–3:50 Verse 3
(Note feedback in background.)
3:50–4:05 B section
4:05–4:58 ChorusLast line repeats nine times.Sound fades on last chord, with guitar feedback.Timings Commen T s
2:45–2:53 Instrumental transition
2:53–3:33 Guitar solo over musical content of verse
3:25–3:33 Ends with instrumental transition to Verse 3.
Listening Guide 33376  rock I n’ o UTthe third record put out by Sub Pop in the label’s history, but they soon jumped ship to issue 
a Grammy-nominated LP for SST entitled Ultramega OK. In the late 1980s, Soundgarden’s promise prompted major label a&r (artist and repertoire) personnel to descend on Seattle in 
search of the next big thing. Polygram signed Mother Love Bone and when that band’s singer, 
the colorful Andrew Wood, died of a heroin overdose, the remaining members formed Pearl Jam with new singer Eddie Vedder and signed with Epic. 
c
olumbia signed Alice in 
c
hains, and 
n
irvana signed with David Geffen’s imprint, DG
c
.
n
irvana’s move to DG
c
 from Sub Pop contained echoes of the historic relationship 
between major and independent labels. Hailing from the dying lumber town of Aberdeen, 
 
Washington, 
n
irvana came to Sub Pop as a relatively untested property driven by the mix of 
angst and ambition that characterized guitarist, singer, and songwriter 
k
urt 
c
obain and his 
close partnership with bassist 
k
rist 
n
ovoselic. The band’s first single, “Love Buzz,” backed 
with “Big 
c
heese,” was the debut record in a new Sub Pop promotional maneuver, its “Singles 
c
lub.” An album, Bleach, followed in 1989,which, though uneven, showcased flashes of 
c
obain’s 
songwriting strengths and had respectable sales, making it into the top ten of the British inde-
pendent charts. Sub Pop, for its part, proved better at stimulating media interest than earning profit or paying its artists. As the attention paid to 
n
irvana grew, 
c
obain became impatient 
with the label, while Sub Pop was unable to adequately support the band. So it was that toward the end of 1990, 
n
irvana signed with DG
c
 in a deal that paid Sub Pop $75,000 and gave the 
label royalty points on the next two records by the band. Without the money, Sub Pop would likely not have stayed afloat.
25
Nevermind, the band’s major label debut, went national with a vengeance. Its massive 
sound was bolstered by the production work of Butch Vig and the sledgehammer drumming 
style of new addition Dave Grohl. Aided significantly by MTV’s decision to push the video of 
its haunting single “Smells Like Teen Spirit” to anthem-of-a-generation status, Nevermind sold 
3 million copies in four months and continued to sell 100,000 copies a week. Nevermind and its hit single captured “a defining moment in rock history,” argued Anthony De
c
urtis. “
n
irvana 
transformed the ’80s into the ’90s.”26 Following its runaway success,  alternative bands began 
entering the mainstream as never before. Pearl Jam’s debut album, Ten , went straight to num-
ber two and, with sales of 7 million copies, could still be found among the top 100 albums three 
years later. The group’s follow-up album, Vs. (1993), entered the charts at number one. Alice 
in 
c
hains enjoyed similar success. In 
o
ctober 1992, with their 1990 debut, Facelift, still on the 
charts, the group’s second album, Dirt, entered the Billboard 200 at number six. That same 
week, Pearl Jam’s Ten  held the number seven slot, and the multi-artist compilation soundtrack 
to 
c
ameron 
c
rowe’s Singles, the film that put Seattle on the big screen, was at number ten.
Success did not sit well with 
k
urt 
c
obain, however. Even though he pursued it with ac-
tive intensity, he was visibly uneasy in the spotlight. His unpredictability made the band’s con-
certs wildly exciting, but his public behavior showed increased signs of self-destructiveness, a product of the heroin addiction he nursed in private. At the same time, his vulnerability, ironic 
commentary on his own stardom, and outspoken criticism of the homophobia and misogyny that were routine within the world of conventional hard rock made him into an iconic figure for millions of young fans who identified with his articulate outsider persona. When he battled with DG
c
 over the production of 
n
irvana’s 1993 release, In Utero, the long-awaited studio  rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 377follow-up to Nevermind, his integrity appeared unsullied by his fame. His work on the album 
reflected his relationship with new wife 
c
ourtney Love—the singer and guitarist for the band 
Hole—and their child, Frances Bean, whose presence pervaded the album.27
Despite proclaiming to Rolling Stone, “I’ve never been happier,” upon In Utero’s release, 
things were falling apart personally and professionally. After a triumphant appearance on the MTV show Unplugged in late 1993 that would result in 
n
irvana’s final, posthumous album, 
c
obain deteriorated during a tumultuous tour of Europe. 
o
n April 8, 1994, he was found dead 
in his Seattle home of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head. Donna Gaines, author of 
Teenage Wasteland, a superb book on teen suicide, wrote in Rolling Stone: “His suicide was a 
betrayal; it negated an unspoken contract among members of a generation who depended on one another to reverse the parental generation’s legacy of neglect, confusion and frustration. 
c
obain broke that promise. He just walked.”28 Thus, n irvana’s contribution to the music that 
bore their imprint was cut short.
Although 
c
obain’s death left an enormous void in the wider alternative movement, it did 
not stop the phenomenon in its tracks. Established standard-bearers such as Sonic Youth—whose deal with Geffen had preceded 
n
irvana’s and contributed to the younger group’s 
decision to sign with the label—continued to pursue careers that balanced success with ex-perimentation. Some Seattle bands enjoyed their greatest notoriety, especially Soundgarden, whose 1994 album, Superunknown, became its first to go to number one. Alternative had taken its place, along with rap and metal, as one of the predominant voices of youth culture.
Lollapalooza and Pop Punk: Mainstreaming the Counterculture
rap, metal, and alternative fans were perceived as distinct audiences in part because the music 
industry marketing apparatus—like society at large—was divided along lines of race and cul-
ture. Still, they had a fair amount in common, including their age and alienation from the estab-
lishment, and they were united in their commitment to transgression—of musical conventions, 
of societal values, of behavioral norms. If these genres were already individually threatening and controversial, what could be more upsetting than putting them all together? 
n
o doubt this 
thought crossed the mind of Perry Farrell, the leader of Jane’s Addiction, when he organized the first Lollapalooza festival in 1991. If Lollapalooza was designed to create a new, large-scale vehicle for the promotion of alternative values, though, like the rock festivals of years past it also played its part in turning the countercultural impulses of the movement into something amenable to the mass market.
Those earlier rock festivals were on Farrell’s mind as the first Lollapalooza tour was 
under way. “You want to hear some bullshit about Woodstock?” he exclaimed to 
 
Rolling Stone’s 
 
David Fricke. “Jimi Hendrix played, and everybody split on him. People smashed fences down….
It wasn’t exactly Eden. The memory of it, the myth, is something else….I’m lucky because I have that, times twenty-one. I have twenty-one chances to get it right.”
29 In contrast to the 
Woodstock model of a single event in a single place, Farrell and his partners joined forces to 
stage a multi-act touring music festival like the ones held annually in England. Jane’s 
 
Addiction, 
who had recently broken into the Top Twenty with their album Ritual de lo 
 
Habitual, headlined 
the tour. 
o
ther acts included Living 
c
olour, 
n
ine Inch 
n
ails, Ice-T, and Body 
c
ount, the Henry HEAR MORE
Kurt Cobain on 
MySearchLab378  rock I n’ o UTrollins Band, the Butthole Surfers, and Siouxsie and the Banshees. In a summer when main-
stream acts flopped or lost money, the seven-act, twenty-one-city 
 
Lollapalooza tour—assault, 
really—played to a total of 430,000 people and grossed $10 million. “Lollapalooza became,” as 
Boston Globe critic Jim Sullivan wrote, “the surprise smash summer tour of 1991, an artistic suc-
cess and a substantial moneymaker in a recession-plagued season.”30
capturing the tour’s unifying element, the New York Times titled Jon Pareles’s review 
“Howls of 
r
age.” Henry 
r
ollins delivered the vein-popping punk fury that had characterized 
his stage demeanor since fronting Black Flag in the early 1980s. The Butthole Surfers bashed 
away at acid-induced, punk-influenced three-chord garage rock. 
o
ver a mechanized industrial 
beat, Trent 
r
eznor continued the nihilistic rants that had pushed 
n
ine Inch 
n
ails’ Pretty Hate 
Machine to platinum sales. Siouxsie and the Banshees, the only female-fronted act, carried for-
ward the punk spirit of an earlier generation. Living 
c
olour delivered messages about every-
thing from racism to the environment with music as scorching as ever. Jane’s Addiction drifted, 
in Pareles’s words, “from heavy metal stomps to scrabbling funk to finger-picking folk rock….
Mr. Perkins added a touch of Latin Timbales to rock rhythms, while Morgan Fichter on violin brought hints of country and Arabic music to some songs.”
31 It was Ice-T, however, who put 
the show over the top, both musically and politically. After rapping for half his set, he brought 
out his new thrash metal band, Body 
c
ount. It was at Lollapalooza that he first performed “
c
op 
k
iller,” the song that got him in so much political hot water one year later. Like the Butthole 
Surfers, he openly brandished firearms on stage, vowing to avenge police brutality, and teamed 
up with Farrell for a provocative version of Sly Stone’s “Don’t 
c
all Me 
n
igger, Whitey.”
Perhaps more than its music, what made Lollapalooza “al-
ternative” was the continual projection of political messages, con-cerning everything from censorship to the first Gulf War, and the presence of many left-leaning activist organizations, including the 
n
ational Abortion 
r
ights Action League; 
r
efuse and 
r
esist; 
the Hyacinth Foundation, an AIDS group; and Handgun 
c
ontrol, 
Inc. 
o
rganizers for the 1992 edition of Lollapalooza—an election 
year—were clear in their intent: “We got a lot of people registered 
[to vote] last year and this year signing people up is even more important.”32 The political 
booths for Lollapalooza ’92 included 
r
ock the Vote and 
c
ollege Democrats as well as the more 
radical gay activist organization A
c
T-UP , the militant environmental organization 
 
Greenpeace, 
the controversial animal rights group People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA), the 
c
annabis Action 
n
etwork, and the 
c
oalition for the Homeless.
n
ot all observers were impressed. In the Los Angeles punk fanzine Flipside, reviewer 
Al Flipside wondered, “What is so alternative/striking about a $30 show, in a big commercial arena, [where] the only common thread that ties the bands together is to make their huge guarantee?”
33 By the festival’s second edition, many were already beginning to detect a sort of 
formula to the endeavor. Lollapalooza ’92 planners expanded the tour from twenty-one cities 
to thirty-six cities. Unable to get headliners such as 
n
eil Young and 
r
.E.M., organizers had 
to settle for a lineup that included the 
r
ed Hot 
c
hili Peppers, Pearl Jam, Soundgarden, Ice 
c
ube, Ministry, the Jesus and Mary 
c
hain, and Lush (with a second stage for lesser-known 
acts like 
c
ypress Hill, the Boo Yaa Tribe, and Sharkbait). In the five months it took to put Perhaps more than its music, what 
made Lollapalooza “alternative” was 
the continual projection of political 
messages, concerning everything from 
censorship to the first Gulf War, and the presence of many left-leaning activist organizations.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 379the show together, Pearl Jam’s Ten  and the c hili Peppers’ Blood Sugar Sex Magik both made 
the Top Ten, peaking at numbers two and three, respectively. Soundgarden’s 
 
Badmotorfinger  
had gone Top Forty, and Ice 
c
ube’s Death Certificate, which had peaked at number two, was 
still riding the charts. The festival nearly doubled its audience (to 800,000) and its take (to 
$19 million). Despite the strong showing, 
c
hili Peppers vocalist Anthony 
k
iedis complained 
that the 1992 lineup was “way too male” and, especially on the main stage, “way too gui -
tar-oriented.”34 kim n eely captured the larger transition in the festival’s stature between its 
first year and its second: “Lollapalooza ’91 was the underdog tour that could….But that was 
last year….This year, everyone wants to be alternative, and Lollapalooza ’92 was viewed as a 
golden egg from the git-go.”35
By 1993, other artists had developed alternatives to the alternative festival, the most 
notable of which was Alternative 
n
ation, featuring the Spin Doctors, Soul Asylum, and 
 
Screaming Trees. By tour time, the Spin Doctors’ 1991 debut, A Pocket Full of Kryptonite, had reached platinum status. Soul Asylum’s Grave Dancer’s Union had already gone platinum. (The 
group’s video for the single “
r
unaway Train” featured listings of missing children and led to a 
gig at the White House as President 
c
linton signed the youth service bill.) Screaming Trees’ 
Sweet Oblivion album and “
n
early Lost You” single from the Singles  soundtrack announced the 
group’s arrival after eight years and six albums. Like Lollapalooza, Alternative 
n
ation was a 
summer-long tour that played to hundreds of thousands in sold-out shows across the country. It was dubbed by Rolling Stone “the Little Lollapalooza That 
c
ould.” Meanwhile, Lollapalooza 
ran for several further editions, its success ebbing and flowing with each passing year until 1998, when organizers pulled the plug. (Farrell revived the festival in 2003 upon the reunion 
of Jane’s Addiction.) Although criticism of Lollapalooza had become something of an annual sport by the time of its demise, all the Lollapalooza tours crossed lines of class, race, and gen-der in ways that most tours avoided like the plague. While it lasted, Lollapalooza presented a reasonably representative cross section of what was going on musically in youth culture, and did so with far more heart, spontaneity, and political awareness than the festival held on the twenty-fifth anniversary of Woodstock.
Yet the brightest spot at Woodstock 94 represented another crucial development, one 
that paralleled the mainstreaming of alternative but followed its own trajectory. Amidst the boredom and nostalgia of that thoroughly not alternative festival, Green Day stood out for its unwillingness to take things seriously. Singer/guitarist Billie Joe Armstrong opted to have a giant mud fight with the crowd, announcing at one point, “This isn’t love and peace, it’s fuck-
ing anarchy.” At the time, the Berkeley, 
c
alifornia, punk band’s third album and major label 
debut, Dookie, had been gradually gaining chart momentum; after the festival appearance the 
band’s sales soared, and Dookie peaked at number two on the Bill-
board album chart, spawning several hit singles in the process and winning the 1995 Grammy for Best Alternative Album.
Green Day’s ascent marked the long-delayed commercial 
breakthrough of punk rock in the United States. Although many viewed 
n
irvana’s success as the first major instance in which punk 
had broken into the pop mainstream—a 1992 film documenting the band’s 1991 tour with Sonic Youth was titled 1991: The Year Punk Green Day’s commercial success made 
them outcasts in the world of Gilman 
Street, but the group’s members em-
braced the contradictions of bringing 
punk—a style founded upon an antago-nistic relationship to the mainstream—to a new level of visibility in a way that 
Kurt Cobain never could.
380  rock I n’ o UTBroke — n irvana could not be called punk in any straightforward sense of the term. c obain 
may have preached allegiance to punk values of DIY anticommercialism in his interviews, but 
his music was too much a hybrid of punk, Beatles-esque pop, and heavy rock of the Black Sab-
bath variety. Green Day, by contrast, was obviously indebted to 1970s punk precursors such 
as the Sex Pistols, the 
c
lash, and the Jam, so much so that some critics saw them as just a pale 
imitation of their more confrontational predecessors. As Gina Arnold observed, however, the band was no Johnny-
r
otten-come-latelys. “What Green Day have that many other bands on 
the market today lack is context,” she wrote in 1997, pointing out that the band had come of age in one of the most credible outposts of American punk, the club at 924 Gilman Street in Berkeley that had been started in 1987 by one of the scene’s most outspoken figures, Maximum Rock ‘n’ Roll founder Tim Yohannon.
36 Green Day’s commercial success made them outcasts in 
the world of Gilman Street, but the group’s members embraced the contradictions of bringing 
punk—a style founded upon an antagonistic relationship to the mainstream—to a new level of 
visibility in a way that 
k
urt 
c
obain never could.
By the end of 1994, two other 
c
alifornia punk bands, 
o
range 
c
ounty’s the 
o
ffspring 
and the East Bay’s 
r
ancid, also found themselves with hit albums (the 
o
ffspring’s Smash had 
actually begun to take off before Green Day). Both bands recorded not for major labels but for 
the independent Epitaph, run by Brett Gurewitz, whose own band Bad 
r
eligion had blazed a 
trail for punk played with the energy of hardcore but the hooks of pop. While purists would continue to raise concerns about punk having lost its core values for years to come, a different case could be made: that punk’s endurance and persistent challenge to mainstream pop values had opened the way for its eventual acceptance.
37Green Day was responsible for a commercial 
breakthrough of punk that put them at odds with their own community of reference,  
and continued their commercial success 
through the release of American Idiot and 21st Century Breakdown until leader Billie  
Joe Armstrong (front, left) had one.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 381Country into Pop
All the column inches devoted to alternative tended to obscure the biggest commercial 
breakthrough of the 1990s—country music. If the early 1990s belonged to any one artist, it was Garth Brooks. Billboard  listed Brooks as Top Pop Album Artist and Top 
c
ountry 
Album Artist for the years 1991, 1992, and 1993. In 1992, 
n
B
c
 aired a Garth Brooks spe-
cial opposite a 
c
BS Michael Jackson special. Jackson placed sixty-sixth in the ratings, while 
Brooks finished among the ten highest-rated shows. All six of his albums—Garth Brooks,  No 
Fences,  Ropin’ the Wind,  In Pieces,  Beyond the Season, and The Chase—could be found among 
the 100 most popular albums of 1993. (No Fences and Ropin’ the Wind had sold about 10 mil-
lion copies each by year’s end.) 
r
eleased in September 1991, Ropin’ the Wind—aided by the 
still-new SoundScan method of tallying chart activity—went straight to number one and remained there for eight weeks. After fending off challenges from Hammer, Guns ‘n’ 
r
oses, 
U2, Michael Jackson, and 
n
irvana, it regained the number one position in January 1992 for 
another ten weeks.
Brooks was neither your average superstar nor your aver-
age country singer. A paunchy, slightly balding singer from Yu-
kon, 
o
klahoma, he made it big with no major tale of woe to hang 
his considerable hat on. While exposed early on to country greats like Merle Haggard and George Jones, he also praised 
k
iss, 
k
ansas, 
 
Electric Light 
o
rchestra (EL
o
), and Styx. His music was unlike that 
of “new traditionalists” such as 
r
icky Skaggs and Emmylou Harris (both of whom achieved 
a certain amount of crossover appeal in the early 1980s by updating honky-tonk heroes like 
Hank Williams and Lefty Frizzell) and unlike the pop country that followed the success of the film Urban Cowboy. Brooks came from a generation of country artists whose blend of folk, 
country, and rock ‘n’ roll ran the gamut from the songs of James Taylor to the mellow country 
rock of the Eagles, to the raucous southern boogie of Lynyrd Skynyrd. His performance style was steeped in the arena rock aesthetic, including theater smoke, pyrotechnics, and sophisti-cated lighting effects.
n
eedless to say, Brooks’s fame caused a shakeup in 
n
ashville and highlighted a genera-
tion gap in country music. 
n
ot only was Brooks a best-selling country artist under the age of 
forty (indeed, the ten best-selling country artists of 1992 were all under forty), but also his material challenged some of country music’s most sacred cows. In 1991, the 
n
ashville 
n
etwork 
(T
nn
) refused to air the video of “The Thunder 
r
olls,” in which a woman shoots her abusive 
husband. “We Shall Be Free,” a response to the 
r
odney 
k
ing beating, includes lines supportive 
of gay rights. Brooks played two benefits that raised $1 million for South 
c
entral Los Angeles. 
He also defended his music. “
n
o one could doubt that we did country music,” he told one inter-
viewer in 1993. “
o
ne thing was who I surrounded myself with: two guys from 
k
ansas, three 
from 
o
klahoma. 
o
ut in front you’ve got steel guitar, fiddle, you got hats, we’re all wearing 
Wranglers and 
r
opers.” While he acknowledged his shows’ arena rock mentality, his bottom 
line was that he and his band were “just a bunch of country bumpkins who got lucky. And know that they got lucky.”
38Brooks was neither your average su-
perstar nor your average country singer. 
A paunchy, slightly balding singer from 
Yukon, Oklahoma, he made it big with 
no major tale of woe to hang his consid-erable hat on.
382  rock I n’ o UTBrooks’s crossover triumph and overwhelming popularity opened up unprecedented 
space on the pop charts for other country artists. Between 1991 and 1996, 
c
lint Black, 
r
eba 
McIntyre, Travis Tritt, Vince Gill, Trisha Yearwood, Dwight Yoakam, George Strait, Billy 
r
ay 
c
yrus, Mary 
c
hapin 
c
arpenter, Tim McGraw, and Faith Hill were among the best-selling 
pop artists of a given year. In 1992, country radio had an 11.6 percent market share, second 
only to adult contemporary’s 18.1 percent. T
nn
’s 1.6 percent cable channel market share may 
not have set any records, but it was higher than MTV’s 0.6 percent. At least two Garth Brooks albums could be found among the year’s best-selling albums for every year of the decade excep. 1997. The year Brooks was absent, a teenaged LeAnn 
r
imes placed three albums among the 50 
best-selling albums, including Blue at 5.7 million copies and counting. Bracketing 
r
imes’s suc-
cess, Shania Twain’s The Woman in Me and Come on Over were among the ten best-selling al-bums of 1996 and 1998, respectively. Two years later, Come on Over was still among the twenty 
best-selling albums of the year.
Like Brooks, Ellen “Shania” Twain (her nickname taken from the 
o
jibway Indian word 
for “I’m on my way”) was not your average country artist. She was born in Windsor, 
o
ntario, 
and turned to music in her early twenties to help support her family after her parents were killed in a car crash. Her self-titled debut album won little critical praise, but her sexy video for “What Made You Say That” caught the attention of Mutt Lange, whose producer credits included A
c
/D
c
, Def Leppard, and the 
c
ars. Lange became Twain’s producer (and husband), 
propelling her next two albums to multiplatinum success. At twelve times platinum without 
touring, The Woman in Me made Twain a superstar before most of her fans had seen her live. In 
1998, she started a two-year world tour in support of Come on Over, which had two versions: a country version for the U.S. audience and a pop-oriented international version. By the end 
of the decade, Come on Over had sold 34 million copies worldwide, the most ever by a female 
artist. Twain and Lange then retreated to their new home in Switzerland to concentrate on raising a family.Garth Brooks, more than any other artist, domi-
nated the early 1990s and turned country music into the biggest commercial breakthrough of the 
decade. With his roots in the country tradition, he 
packed his live performances with all the glitz of an arena rock show.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 383The female partner of another couple—Faith Hill and Tim McGraw, both top country 
performers and touring partners—also scored in the late 1990s. Following a string of country 
crossover successes in the mid-1990s, Hill unveiled a new, sexier image and more pop-oriented 
material for Breathe (1999), whose title song became the best-selling single of 2000. Like alter-
native, country was now fully pop—and both country and pop were changed in the process. 
In this case, the pop mainstream became reflective of a social environment in which more and more Americans lived in what became known as the Sun Belt states of the South and South-west, the result of a decades-long pattern of migration that made for a cultural landscape in which it was not unusual for an “average American” to speak or sing with a Southern drawl.
The Latin Boom and Beyond
Another demographic shift also made its mark on the pop charts starting in the late 1990s—
one that suggested an even more substantial change in the boundaries that defined American popular taste. 
n
ineteen ninety-nine could be called the Year of the Latin Pop Explosion. It was 
the year that 
r
icky Martin shook his bon bon into the hearts of millions. And it was the year 
that 
c
arlos Santana recorded Supernatural , which earned him a record-tying eight 
 
Grammys. 
Among the Latino/a artists who had Top Ten pop hits that year were 
c
hristina Aguilera 
 
(“Genie in a Bottle,” “What a Girl Wants”), Marc Anthony (“I 
n
eed to 
k
now”), Gloria Estefan 
(“Music of My Heart,” with ’
n
 Sync), Enrique Iglesias (“Bailamos”), Jennifer Lopez (“If You 
Had My Love,” “Waiting for Tonight”), and, of course, Martin (“Livin’ La Vida Loca,” “She’s 
All I Ever Had,” “Shake Your Bon Bon”), and Santana (“Smooth,” featuring 
r
ob Thomas). 
These pop successes were the surface manifestations of broader and deeper changes taking place in the Latino community, which came to fruition over the course of the next decade.
Between 1990 and 2005, according to census data, the number of immigrants in the 
United States (documented and undocumented) rose from 19.8 million to 35.7 million, “a num-
ber larger than the population of 
c
alifornia.”39 More of these immigrants—about 11 million—
came from Mexico than from any other country. As of 2004, the U.S. 
c
ensus Bureau listed over 
40 million residents of the United States as being of “Hispanic 
o
rigin,”40 surpassing African 
Americans as the country’s largest ethnic group. 
n
ew arrivals no longer limited themselves to 
the historical points of entry like 
c
alifornia, 
n
ew York, Texas, and Florida. Dramatic 
 
increases 
occurred in Indiana, South Dakota, Delaware, Missouri, 
c
olorado, and 
n
ew Hampshire,41 
 
resulting in a nationally dispersed Latino population. Just as internal migration during World 
War II created national markets for regional musics, international immigration in the age of 
globalization would profoundly alter the U.S. cultural landscape once again.
In 1997, the 
n
ational Academy of 
r
ecording Arts and Sciences (
n
A
r
AS) gave its bless-
ing to the formation of a Latin Grammy organization, the Latin Academy of 
r
ecording Arts 
and Sciences (LA
r
AS), and also established a new Best Latin 
r
ock/Alternative Grammy 
of its own, essentially recognizing that the rock en español of groups like Maná, Los Fabulo -
sos 
c
adillacs, 
c
afé Tacuba, and Molotov had gained a foothold in the United States. During 
this period, other events also raised the profile of Latin music in the mainstream. Selena, a 
feature-length Hollywood biopic about the Queen of Tejano Music—following her untimely 384  rock I n’ o UTdeath in 1995—catapulted Jennifer Lopez (in the title role) to pop stardom. r y c ooder’s 
 accidental blockbuster album, The Buena Vista Social Club, contained a stylistic assortment of son, 
 
descarga , danzón , mambo,  cha-cha-cha,  guajiro, and bolero and elevated a forgotten group of 
 
aging 
 
traditional 
c
uban musicians like Ibrahim Ferrer and 
c
ompay Segundo to international 
star status. Finally, Paul Simon’s well-promoted but ultimately flawed Broadway production of 
The 
 
Capeman provided a crossover platform for artists like Marc Anthony, Ednita 
n
azario, and 
r
ubén Blades with its mixture of everything from doo wop and gospel to modern salsa and 
merengue. Even 
n
ew York Puerto 
r
ican rapper the late Big Pun(isher) hit the Top Thirty with 
“Still 
n
ot a Player.” By the time LA
r
AS staged its own separate primetime Latin Grammys 
telecast in 2000, Martin and Santana were positioned to take home multiple trophies.
r
icky Martin was the Puerto 
r
ican version of the teen pop superstars. At age twelve, he 
was a (replaceable) member of the international teen sensation Menudo. Following some suc-
cessful soap opera work (General Hospital), a stint on Broadway (Les Misérables), and a string of four successful solo albums (totaling sales of 15 million units), Martin jump-started the late-1990s Latin pop explosion with his electrifying performance of “
c
up of Life” at the Grammys. 
In May 1999, 
c
olumbia released Martin’s first English-language album, Ricky Martin, which 
shot to number one, and he began “Livin’ La Vida Loca” in earnest. It was so loca, in fact, that 2001 found him sharing the stage with Wayne 
n
ewton and Destiny’s 
c
hild at the presidential 
inaugural, where he “persuaded [President George W .] Bush to come onstage and give his pelvis a twitch or two (albeit small, tastefully presidential ones).”
42
At the time of Martin’s ascent, Santana appeared to be a 1960s superstar past his prime, 
without a Top Forty album or single since 1982. Some seventeen years later, an angel named 
Metatron, whom Santana says visits him frequently, told him, “You will be inside the radio 
frequency for the purpose of connecting the molecules with the light,” which Santana imme-
diately understood to be a new album, on the radio, connecting people with their spiritual selves.
43 Santana delivered Metatron’s message verbatim to Arista president c live Davis, who, 
being a veteran of the sixties himself, also understood. If Santana was the spiritual force be-
hind Supernatural, Davis was its architect, planning the album as half vintage Santana and half 
collaborations—with 
r
ob Thomas from Matchbox Twenty, Dave Matthews, Everlast, Lauryn 
Hill, 
c
ee-Lo, Maná, Eagle Eye 
c
herry, and Eric 
c
lapton. Arista released the 
album in June 1999, with “Smooth” (featuring 
r
ob Thomas) as its first sin-
gle. Both album and single went to number one, taking Supernatural’s sales 
past 10 million. If Martin was the brash young Latino crossover heartthrob of the moment (despite the buzz of his being gay), Santana comported him-self more like an elder statesman of music. Both men stressed the impor-tance of family and spirituality in their lives.
The success of Martin and Santana created space for other Latin artists on the pop 
 
charts—
most notably Jennifer Lopez and later Shakira. In 1999, when Lopez recorded On the 6 (after 
her childhood 
n
ew York subway line), she had already established herself as one of the highest 
paid actresses in Hollywood, commanding up to $9 million per movie. With major label backing from Epic and with producers of the caliber of Emilio Estefan and Sean “Puffy” 
c
ombs (with 
whom she had a high-profile, tortured affair), On the 6 reached sales of 6 million and Lopez scored a number one single with “If You Had My Love.” For her second outing, J.Lo, she continued in If Martin was the brash young Latino 
crossover heartthrob of the moment 
(despite the buzz of his being gay), 
Santana comported himself more like 
an elder statesman of music. Both men stressed the importance of family and spirituality in their lives.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 385
Listening Guide 34Musical Style Notes
“Livin’ La Vida Loca” instantly 
establishes its Latin musical influ-
ence with its percussion style, dance 
rhythms, and brass-heavy instrumenta-
tion. Layered over this are Martin’s vocals, Rusty Anderson’s treble-heavy, 
surf-style guitar solos, and, near the 
end of the track, a dazzlingly high trumpet part played by Tony Concepción. Structur-ally, it is a verse-chorus form; the verse has two sections of contrasting melodic con-tent, and the chorus features an extremely catchy hook in the “Livin’ La Vida Loca” line at the end—the kind of musical phrase that gets stuck in your brain for the rest of the day. With the hook, the dance rhythms, the surf licks, and Martin’s charismatic vocal style, the different elements of “Livin’ La Vida Loca” comprised a sure-fire for-mula for a hit single.
The musicians on “Livin’ La Vida Loca” are Ricky Martin, lead vocal; Rusty 
Anderson, guitar; Randy Cantor, keyboards; Robi Draco Rosa, background vocals; 
Rafael Solano, percussion; and Tony Concepción, trumpet.
Musical “Road Map”
Timings Commen T s
0:00–0:13 Instrumental introduction: full band, including horn section, Latin percussion
0:13–0:29 Verse 1, A section of the melody (short guitar interlude before verse 2)
0:29–0:40 Verse 2, A section of the melody
0:40–0:53 Verse 2, B section of the melody vocal harmony
0:53–1:20 Chorus
1:20–1:31 Same music as Introduction
1:31–1:41 Verse 3, A section of the melody texture change at beginning
1:41–1:55 Verse 3, B section of the melody
1:55–2:22 Chorus
2:22–2:32 Guitar instrumental solo
(Note surf style.)
2:32–2:46 New verse, B section only
2:46–3:08 Chorus
3:08–3:35 Chorus repeats.
3:35–4:01 Guitar instrumental solo (overlaid with super-high trumpet solo; listen at 3:46);  
takes the track to the end at 4:01.“Livin’ La Vida Loca”
Artist:
 
Ricky Martin
Music/Lyrics by Desmond Child 
and Robi Draco Rosa
Label:
 
Sony, from the CD Martin  
(1999)
With a well-timed shake of his bon bon 
and an infectious award-winning hit single, Ricky Martin ushered in a Latin pop explo-
sion just before the turn of the century.
386  rock I n’ o UTthe dance/pop vein; on the compilation of remixes that followed, Lopez entered politically sen-
sitive territory by using the word nigger on the Murder, Inc., remix of “I’m 
r
eal” (featuring Ja 
r
ule). With her street cred in question, the first single from her third full-length studio album, 
This Is Me . . . Then (2002), was “Jenny from the Block,” on which Lopez tried to convince her lis-
teners that she was still just plain folks from the ’hood. Following her tabloid romance with Ben Affleck and marriage to Marc Anthony, she released Rebirth (2005). By 2007, she had embraced 
her Latino roots, releasing the all Spanish Como Ama una Mujer, but hedged her bets with a tour supporting the more pop-oriented Brave. In 2011, she jump-started her career once again when she became a judge on American Idol, following the departure of Simon 
c
owell, and released the 
album, Love?, which went top five and featured hit collaborations with Lil Wayne and Miami-
based 
c
uban rapper Pitbull.
In contrast to the U.S. born Lopez, Shakira Isabel Mebarak 
r
ipoll was born in 
 
Barranquilla, 
c
olombia; her father, born in 
n
ew York, is of Lebanese descent. At thirteen, she 
auditioned for a Sony executive in Barranquilla, who signed her to a three-record deal. She was 
already a pop superstar throughout Latin America—performing her own rock-oriented compo-sitions—before coming to the attention of her U.S. fans. Her U.S. rise began with1998’s Dónde Están Los Ladrones? (Where Are the Thieves?), a worldwide hit that spent eleven weeks at number one on the U.S. Latin album chart. Poised for crossover success in the United States, Shakira allied herself with impresario Freddy DeMann, who had nurtured the careers of 
 
Madonna and 
Michael Jackson. Her MTV Unplugged special was the channel’s first-ever Spanish-language cablecast, and the resulting album, released in 2000, earned her a Grammy for Best Latin Pop Album. 
Determined to remove any remaining obstacles to mainstream pop superstardom, Shakira 
dyed her hair blonde and taught herself English well enough to sing and write in it. Her first (mostly) English album, Laundry Service (2001)—for which she wrote or co-wrote every song—achieved triple platinum sales, propelled by the infectious Latin/dance/rock groove of “When-ever, Wherever.” Shakira had earned a reputation as a serious rockera and a writer of poetic lyrics, 
described by one critic as “emphatically self-expressive and somewhat surreal.”
44 Following an 
extended break during which she wrote about sixty songs in English and Spanish, Shakira re-
leased two albums six months apart in 2005, divided by language: Fijación Oral, Vol. 1 and Oral 
Fixation, Vol. 2. Both hit the Top Five on the pop album charts and earned Shakira a massive 
crossover audience. Vol. 2 was rereleased in 2006 to include her runaway hit single “Hips Don’t Lie” (featuring Wyclef Jean); its video portrayed Shakira at her sensual best, combining erotic but tasteful dance moves from her Middle Eastern heritage with a hot Latin dance groove. By 2006, Shakira had become a truly global pop star, incorporating influences ranging from pop, rock, and disco to cumbia, tejano, and reggaeton into a coherent bilingual musical project.
The disparate events and variations of style that created the late-1990s Latin boom not 
only showcased the diversity of artists and musics that constituted the Latin music category, they also begged the question: What is Latin music? Shakira is a case in point. Although she 
hails from a Latin American nation, she is of mixed ethnicity, and her music is built on a mix of rock, r&b, and electronic dance music as well as a variety of styles that represent “Latin” music within and outside the U.S. In what sense, then, is music like Shakira’s “Latin”? LA
r
AS 
sidestepped the question, describing the inadequacy of the term in the opening line of one of its  rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 387website pages: “‘Latin Music’ has never been more than a shorthand for a universe of rhythms 
and styles as diverse as the people who created them. For a while it was a useful convention. 
n
ot any more.”45 operationally, Latin music has been defined as music made by Latinos for 
 
Latinos—which begs another question: Who is Latino?
In the United States, Latino is used as an umbrella term referring to people of Latin 
 
American descent who live permanently in the United States. It is a social construct that purports 
to describe a number of very different cultures and ethnic groups, each of which has a different historical relationship to the United States and to each other. According to ethnomusicologist Deborah Pacini Hernandez, the major social function of the term is to distinguish people of Latin American descent from others in the United States.
46 But as Pacini Hernandez points out, c ubans, 
Puerto 
r
icans, Mexicans, 
c
olombians, Salvadorans, Dominicans, and so forth cannot be reduced 
to a single ethnic category any more than Western Europeans can. The experiences of 
c
hicanos, 
who have been a major presence in the Southwestern United States since the Spanish-American War, are different from those of newcomers from the Spanish 
c
aribbean, whose major waves of 
immigration didn’t start until after World War II. The term Latino  is often used synonymously 
with the more prevalent (and more controversial) term Hispanic, which extends the umbrella to include Spain. There is also debate about whether Latino includes immigrants from Portuguese-speaking Brazil, whose musical styles are well represented in the Latin Grammy categories.
The term Latino has historically been associated with the Spanish language, which is of 
particular importance in the United States, where pop hits are customarily English only. 
o
ver 
time, however, the relationship among language, musical form, and identity changes. The most 
popular late-1990s youth-oriented Latino magazines such as Hispanic,  Urban, and particularly 
Frontera attempted to incorporate styles like rock and rap into positive Latino identities without the taint of inauthenticity. In these magazines, the guest vocal of 
c
elia 
c
ruz, the Queen of Salsa, 
on Wyclef Jean’s hip hop version of “Guantanamera” was viewed positively, as was the fact of Sen Dogg, the Afro-
c
uban member of 
c
ypress Hill, starting the hard-core punk outfit SX10. 
In the final analysis, the formation of ethnic identities is a historically fluid process forged in the cauldron of changing social relations and ideological imperatives, rather than something tied to the immutable characteristics of a particular musical tradition or song form. 
n
owhere was this 
cultural hybridity more evident than in the formation and dispersion of reggaeton.
r
eggaeton, a quintessentially hybrid music that combines el-
ements of hip hop and Jamaican dancehall filtered through Spanish 
c
aribbean sensibilities, became the first genre with Spanish vocals 
ever to find mainstream acceptance in the United States. It arose in part from the impact that Jamaican reggae had in Puerto 
r
ico and 
Panama, where descendants of Jamaican workers had begun per-forming what was called reggae en español . During the same period, 
n
ew York–based Puerto 
r
icans transported rap to Puerto 
r
ico, 
where artists like Vico 
c
 indigenized it as rap en español.
By the late 1980s, Panamanian artist El General (“Tu Pum Pum,” 1988), considered 
by many to be the father of reggaeton, had adapted the insistent bounce of dancehall reggae for Latin American audiences. Living in 
n
ew York when he recorded many of his hits, but 
singing in Spanish, El General’s music had enormous appeal in Puerto 
r
ico, where Jamaican Reggaeton, a quintessentially hybrid 
music that combines elements of hip 
hop and Jamaican dancehall filtered 
through Spanish Caribbean sensibilities, 
became the first genre with Spanish vocals ever to find mainstream accep-tance in the United States.
388  rock I n’ o UTdancehall had already achieved widespread popularity. Puerto r ican DJs like Playero and DJ 
n
elson drew upon Jamaican artist Shabba 
r
anks’s “Dem Bow,” with its minimalist dancehall 
beat punctuated by snare drum accents, to develop the sound further. Around the mid-1990s, 
these elements began to coalesce into what is now known as reggaeton. But it wasn’t until 
n
ew York–based 
n
.
o
.
r
.E.’s “
o
ye Mi 
c
anto” (2004)—a driving appeal to inclusiveness and 
pan-
 
Latino identity—opened the door to reggaeton in the United States and Daddy Yankee’s 
Barrio Fino, with its ubiquitous hit single “Gasolina,” flooded the market that reggaeton be -
came a mainstream phenomenon.
From 2004 to 2005, Billboard reported that Latin music was the only category of music 
that had registered growth.47 The magazine attributed the expansion to Shakira and reggae-
ton. Shakira herself incorporated a reggaeton sound on “La Tortura,” a duet with Alejandro 
Sanz, from Fijación Oral, Vol. 1. The song’s video was reportedly the first in Spanish to go into 
regular rotation on MTV . Indeed, on July 30, 2005, every Top Ten song on the Latin 
 
Tropical 
Airplay chart had some connection to reggaeton. Also at this time, Daddy Yankee’s Barrio Fino 
was the best-selling Latin album in the country and the first reggaeton album to debut at num-ber one on the Latin charts.
Daddy Yankee had been an important figure in the Puerto 
r
ican underground since the 
early nineties and had started building a higher reggaeton profile later in the decade. With 
Universal’s promotional clout behind Barrio Fino in 2004, he was first out of the gate for the HEAR MORE
Reggaeton on 
MySearchLab
Daddy Yankee had been a pivotal artist in the Puerto Rican underground for more than a decade 
before his ubiquitous single “Gasolina” conquered the mainland mainstream.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 389crossover crown of mainstream U.S. acceptance. Although “Gasolina”—a bouncy dance track 
that was a playful metaphor for sex—was the single that caught on in the United States, the album also contained several other well-produced songs that received significant exposure 
on Latin radio. Daddy Yankee entered into a joint venture with Interscope for Barrio Fino: 
En Directo (2005), which also hit number one on the Latin charts and sent its lead single “
r
ompe” to number 24 on the Hot 100, confirming Daddy Yankee as the most important reg-
gaeton artist to date.
c
ompeting with Daddy Yankee to be the reggaeton king were Tego 
c
alderón—the 
thinking person’s counterpart to Daddy Yankee’s party animal persona—Don 
o
mar, and 
 
Wisin 
& Yandel. Among women, Ivy Queen was one of the few that could compete as an equal in a male-dominated and often misogynistic environment. Ivy Queen had been around the Puerto 
r
ican underground dance scene since before reggaeton. Her debut album, En Mi Imperio ( In 
My Empire), appeared in 1996. Four albums, a slew of hit singles, and a Shakira-like makeover 
later, she joined the 2005 reggaeton explosion with Flashback, a collection of old and new music that included “
c
uéntale” at number one on the Latin singles charts.
As multiplying numbers of reggaeton artists made inroads into the U.S. mainstream, 
a single production team, Luny Tunes, dominated the music. Luny (Francisco Saldana) and Tunes (Víctor 
c
abrera) were born in the Dominican 
r
epublic and raised in Peabody, 
 
Massachusetts. Moving to Puerto 
r
ico at the invitation of DJ 
n
elson, they quickly eclipsed all 
other reggaeton producers in their uncanny ability to generate hits, including Daddy Yankee’s “Gasolina,” Don 
o
mar’s “Dale Don Dale,” and Wisin & Yandel’s “
r
akata.” Among their many 
accomplishments was the incorporation of Dominican elements of bachata and merengue into reggaeton. As one well-known DJ in Puerto 
r
ico noted, “Luny Tunes contributed something 
very positive, 
 
because they…made it what it is, a tropical music, in that way it distinguished 
it from hip hop.”48 Their compilation albums, Mas Flow (2003), La Trayectoria (2004), and Mas 
Flow, Vol. 2 (2005), became some of reggaeton’s best-selling albums.
First and foremost a type of club music, reggaeton’s gut-level appeal was most appar-
ent on the dance floor, where the prevailing dance style, perreo (doggystyle), invited sexual-
ized movements that went well beyond suggestive. Like disco before it, reggaeton’s ability to generate hits from the dance floor forced radio to take it more seriously. Stations formatted for hip hop and r&b began adding a few reggaeton cuts like “
o
ye Mi 
c
anto” and “Gasolina.” 
Then some Spanish-language stations began moving toward a reggaeton-centric format even-tually dubbed Hurban (“Hispanic urban”). History was made when 
k
X
o
L-FM in Los Angeles 
switched from easy listening to reggaeton in the summer of 2005 and went from eighteenth to second in market share—and to first among listeners twelve to twenty-four years old.
49 Imme-
diately following, Univision flipped eight major market stations to a reggaeton-centered format 
they called La Kalle (“the street”), 
c
lear 
c
hannel converted four stations, and others followed 
suit. “We’ve found that the appeal of reggaeton is universal,” said 
c
lear 
c
hannel senior vice 
president for programming, Tom Poleman. “It’s not just about Latin listeners; white suburban 
kids have a lot of passion for it.”50
In 2006, four of the five most popular Latin albums of the year were reggaeton albums, 
with Don 
o
mar’s King of Kings crossing over to number seven on the pop album charts. 
Tego 
c
alderón had signed with Atlantic and had begun to venture beyond reggaeton on 390  rock I n’ o UTThe Underdog/El Subestimado. By this time, everyone from Jay-Z, Alicia k eys, and r . k elly to 
Sean Paul, 
r
icky Martin, and Ja 
r
ule had come calling on Luny Tunes for remixes. In 2007, 
the momentum continued. Daddy Yankee’s long-awaited El Cartel: The Big Boss, a dance floor 
delight featuring duets with high-profile pop-rappers like will.i.am, Fergie, and Akon, hit num-
ber nine on the pop album charts. Wisin & Yandel’s Wisin vs. Yandel: Los Extraterrestres hit pop number fourteen. Ivy Queen contributed Sentimiento, at number four on the Latin charts.
By the late-2000s, reggaeton had already had its moment in the sun. Still, it could be seen 
as a case study of how global cultural flows would affect the character of popular culture in the future. It also opened the way for the subsequent U.S. success of Spanish-language artists from other genres such as 
r
omeo Santos, who took Dominican bachata into the top ten of the 
Billboard album charts in 2011 with Formula, Vol. 1, and collaborated with r&b star Usher on 
the hit song, “Promise.”
Black Music at the Base
That a rising Latin music star would collaborate with a black r&b singer to signal his crossover 
to mainstream pop was a sign of the extent to which, from the mid-1990s forward, African American musical styles had powered the pop machine. The industry had long treated rap as 
an illegitimate form, even as it benefited enormously from rap’s sales 
figures. 
n
onetheless, by the opening years of the new millennium, hip 
hop–related artists—especially rappers—had become the predomi-nant trend on the year-end pop charts. This phenomenon had begun with the explosion of gangsta rap in the early 1990s and the marriage of rap and traditional rhythm and blues (r&b) that the music industry eventually dubbed r&b/hip hop.
Hip Hop with Soul: The New R&B
Prominent among the diverse array of musical tastes that surfaced in the early 1990s were r&b 
vocal styles that combined the smooth balladry of r&b veterans like Barry White and 
 
Luther 
Vandross with the hip hop–inflected harmonies of acts like Boyz II Men, En Vogue, TL
c
, 
c
olor Me Badd, Jodeci, Mary J. Blige, and Silk. This smooth r&b sound—initially 
 
referred 
to as hip hop doo wop or hip hop soul—often bore the signatures of African American writer/
 
producers: Teddy 
r
iley, credited with inventing new jack swing with his group Guy (“Groove 
Me” and “Teddy’s Jam,” 1987); Sean “Puffy” 
c
ombs, who established the signature sound of 
Mary J. Blige (What’s the 411?, 1991) before he became a mogul; and Antonio “L.A.” 
r
eid and 
k
enneth “Babyface” Edmunds, who founded LaFace 
r
ecords in 1989, home to TL
c
 and Toni 
 
Braxton. Braxton’s self-titled 1993 debut eventually sold eight times platinum, generating five 
hit 
 
singles. She hit her stride on her sophomore outing, Secrets (1996), featuring the erotic 
“You’re Makin’ Me High” backed with the Diane Warren–penned blockbuster “Un-break My 
Heart,” both number one hits and both Grammy winners.
TL
c
 was discovered by 
r
eid’s writer/producer wife, Pebbles, and signed to LaFace in 
1991. They were launched as a sexy novelty act with Ooooooohhh … On the TLC Tip, whose pop/rap/hip hop singles “ Ain’t 2 Proud 2 Beg,” “Baby, Baby, Baby,” and “What About Your 
That a rising Latin music star would 
collaborate with a black r&b singer 
to signal his crossover to mainstream 
pop was a sign of the extent to which, 
from the mid-1990s forward, African 
 
American musical styles had powered the pop machine.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 391Friends” propelled the album to multiplatinum status. CrazySexyCool (1994) revealed a more 
seasoned group with a polished r&b sound. Generating four Top Ten singles—“
c
reep” and 
“Waterfalls” at number one—the album sold about 11 million copies. Following CrazySexyCool, 
personal and financial troubles kept TL
c
 out of circulation until their spectacular comeback 
with Fan Mail in 1999. Further acrimony ensued, however, and any hopes for a follow-up were 
dashed by the untimely death of Lisa “Left Eye” Lopes in a 2002 car accident.
The top-selling smooth r&b group of the decade was Boyz II Men. With Michael Bivins 
(of 
n
ew Edition and Bell Biv Devoe fame) as their manager, they went from Philadelphia’s 
c
reative and Performing Arts High School to Motown 
r
ecords, where they quickly became 
the label’s best-selling act. “Motownphilly,” the first single from their debut album, Cooleyhigh-
harmony, showcased their musical roots. For the soundtrack of Eddie Murphy’s film Boomer -
ang, they cut a Babyface ballad called “End of the 
r
oad,” which spent a then-record-breaking 
thirteen weeks at number one on the pop charts. Boyz II Men II (1994) established them as the 
premier r&b harmony group of the new era, selling 17 million copies—Motown’s best-selling 
album ever. Its two number one singles—“I’ll Make Love to You” and “
o
n Bended 
k
nee”—
were collaborations with producers Babyface and Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis, respectively. The former song spent fourteen weeks at number one, breaking their previous record, and a duet with Mariah 
c
arey, “
o
ne Sweet Day” (1995), logged sixteen weeks at number one. The 
Boyz themselves produced Evolution (1997), but Jam and Lewis wrote its number one single. Sean “Puffy” 
c
ombs co-wrote and co-produced three of its other singles. Although Evolution  
debuted at number one, sales stalled at about 2 million copies, beginning a downward trend in their popularity.
Destiny’s 
c
hild emerged in Houston in 1990 
and paid seven years of dues before getting signed to 
 c
olumbia in 1997, while still in their teens. Their epon-
ymous debut album sold well, but it was their second 
outing, The Writing’s on the Wall  (1999), and one of its 
hit singles, “Say My 
n
ame,” that established them as 
pop superstars. Unfortunately, at this point the original group self-destructed. After a series of high-profile law-suits and verbal exchanges in the press, their new lineup included Beyoncé 
k
nowles, who had long since become 
the group’s focal point, her cousin 
k
elly 
r
owland, and 
newcomer Michelle Wallace. Their third album, Survi-vor (2001), sold four times platinum, with “Bootylicious” at number one. After that, group members embarked on solo projects, with Beyoncé ascending to superstardom in the new millennium.
With Beyoncé Knowles (center) as its stable center and 
lead vocalist, high drama and personnel changes did not keep Destiny’s Child from becoming superstars.
392  rock I n’ o UTIf there was any one artist who left the biggest imprint on this new sound, it was writer, 
producer, and performer 
r
. 
k
elly. 
r
aised in South Side 
c
hicago, music became 
k
elly’s avenue out 
of poverty. Writing and/or producing music for Toni Braxton, Mary J. Blige, Whitney Houston, 
Boyz II Men, and Michael Jackson, he released his own platinum solo debut, Born into the 90s, in 
1991.  The sexually explicit singles “Sex Me (Parts I and II),” “Bump 
n
’ Grind,” and “Your Body’s 
c
allin’” made his five times platinum second album, 12 Play (1993), a source of controversy. It 
didn’t help that the following year, he produced fifteen-year-old Aaliyah’s debut, Age Ain’t Nothing but a Number, amidst rumors (later proved to be true) that he had married the underage star.
k
elly’s eponymous third album, while still sexually charged, reflected the influence of gos -
pel singer 
k
irk Franklin. R. Kelly (1995) was his first album to hit pop number one. In 1997, 
k
elly 
appeared at one of Franklin’s concerts, proclaiming: “Every day I seem to be falling in love with the Lord… . I used to be flying in sin—now I’m flying in Jesus.”
51 By then he had written the 
G-rated “I Believe I 
c
an Fly” for the Space Jam soundtrack (reportedly at the behest of Michael 
Jordan), which he performed at the Franklin concert to wild applause. At the end of the decade, 
he was still riding high with the two-disc R . (1998), which sold seven times platinum. It was pro-
pelled by a duet with 
c
eline Dion, “I’m Your Angel,” which had a six-week run at number one.
The Best of Both Worlds, a planned collaboration with rapper Jay-Z, was expected to be the 
crowning achievement of the music that Billboard had officially dubbed r&b/hip hop in 1999, 
renaming the r&b charts to reflect the music’s evolution. 
o
n the eve of its release, Vibe maga -
zine called the album “the ultimate union of hip hop and r&b.”52 But the very morning that 
k
elly sang before the opening ceremony of the Winter 
o
lympics in Salt Lake 
c
ity, the Chicago 
Sun-Times broke a story about a videotape of 
k
elly allegedly having sex with a fourteen-year-
old girl. In the ensuing controversy, plans for The Best of Both Worlds stalled—and the album 
ultimately flopped, due to mushrooming legal problems and the general sense that the album didn’t measure up artistically. 
r
&b/hip hop continued to develop in the able hands of artists like 
Mary J. Blige, whose No More Drama (2001) revealed a mature r&b diva with a hip hop edge. But 
k
elly’s career was seriously destabilized. His 2002 single “Heaven, I 
n
eed a Hug” seemed to say 
it all; but his extended form video “hip-hopera” Trapped in the Closet—begun in 2005 and still ongoing in 2012—was a more striking product by an artist who embodied the tradition of what African American cultural critic Mark Anthony 
n
eal has called “Tortured Soul.”53
With k elly embroiled in scandal, Usher arose as r&b’s leading man in 2004, when he 
recorded the most popular album of the year (Confessions) as well as the top two singles (“Yeah!” 
and “Burn”). Confessions sold an incredible 1.1 million units in its first week. The album’s first 
single, “Yeah!” (featuring Lil Jon and Ludacris), which married Dirty South crunk beats to 
an r&b sound, occupied the number one position on the Billboard Hot 100 for a record-tying twelve weeks. It was replaced by “Burn,” an r&b/hip hop song built around Usher’s gentle falsetto, which held the top spot for another seven weeks, giving Usher an unprecedented nine-teen-week run at pop number one. The album also generated two other number one singles—“
c
onfessions Pt. 2” and “My Boo,” a duet with Alicia 
k
eys—placing Usher at the top of Hot 
100 for twenty-eight weeks of the year. Signed to LaFace 
r
ecords by L. A. 
r
eid when he was 
just fourteen, Usher released his first album while he was still in high school and the platinum-selling My Way (1997) shortly after graduating. Confessions (2004) was his fourth studio album; 
it was certified eight times platinum before the year was out. rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 393Branding Rap: Moguls from the Street 
rap broadened stylistically through its entwinement with r&b. The 
music and culture of hip hop also expanded geographically by the 
1990s, moving beyond the East 
c
oast/West 
c
oast poles that had fig-
ured into the deaths of Tupac Shakur and Biggie Smalls and creating 
new vocabularies of place and space. 
r
ap was not simply a buck-wild 
street culture; it was a major corporate enterprise, with the most successful artists often playing the multiple roles of performing art-ist, writer, producer, and label head and taking on appellations like mogul  and impresario. As 
k
eith 
n
egus astutely pointed out, “[
r
]appers who have often been 
identified solely with ‘the street’ are also executives.”54
The artist who best exemplified the move from the street to the executive suite was Sean 
“Puffy” 
c
ombs, a.k.a. Puff Daddy (later P . Diddy, then Diddy). “I strive to be known as a mogul 
entrepreneur,” he told Rolling Stone in 1997, but even then he was plagued by the notion that 
“I’ve gotten my fame through tragedies. My successes have been overlooked.”55 For Puffy, the 
tragedies began in earnest in 1991 when an oversold 
n
ew York celebrity basketball event that 
he promoted resulted in a stampede that left nine people dead. In 1997, Puffy’s relationship to Biggie Smalls’s assassination drew frenzied press. Two years later, he was accused of breaking 
the arm and jaw of Interscope executive Steven Stoute over a dispute about a video. He was ar-rested in 2000 (along with his then-girlfriend Jennifer Lopez and rapper Shyne) for a shootout at 
c
lub 
n
ew York in which three people were injured. But if trouble seemed to follow Puffy 
wherever he went, so did success.
By 1997, 
c
ombs’s Bad Boy Entertainment empire grossed $200 million and employed 
300 people. That year, 
c
ombs—who, as producer, had already launched the careers of Mary J. 
Blige, Mase, Lil’ 
k
im, Foxy Brown, Jodeci, and, of course, 
n
otorious B.I.G. (Biggie Smalls)—
recorded his first album, No Way Out, as rapper Puff Daddy. 
c
redited to Puff Daddy and the 
Family (which included other Bad Boy artists such as Mase, Lil’ 
k
im, the Lox, 112, Black 
r
ob, 
Faith Evans, and the 
n
otorious B.I.G.), No Way Out was certified seven times platinum. Its 
first single, “I’ll Be Missing You,” a duet with Faith Evans (the late Smalls’s estranged wife), 
was Puffy’s eulogy to his friend and protégé that was based on a sample of the Police’s “Every Breath You Take.” Another single, “It’s All About the Benjamins” ($100 bills—which exhibit Benjamin Franklin’s picture), became an anthemic metaphor for the unabashed materialism at the center of the new hip hop culture. Puffy was considered a lightweight rapper and a sample-heavy producer; he even teamed up with Jimmy Page to use the melody from Led Zep-pelin’s “
k
ashmir” (for “
c
ome with Me”). Defending the practice on Forever (1999)—on which 
he sampled Earth, Wind & Fire’s “Fantasy” (for “ Angels with Dirty Faces”) and 
c
hristopher 
c
ross’s “Sailing” (for “My Best Friend”)—Puff Daddy asked reporters: If what he does is so 
easy, why haven’t others followed suit?
c
ombs reinvented himself as P . Diddy in 2001, releasing a gospel album (Thank You) 
and a rap album (The Saga Continues) . The latter was a production extravaganza with over a 
score of rappers and singers and yielded the rock-inflected “Bad Boy for Life,” Diddy’s biggest single in a long time. His empire suffered a setback in 2002, however, when Arista dropped HEAR MORE
Puff Daddy on 
MySearchLabRap was not simply a buck-wild 
street culture; it was a major cor-
porate enterprise, with the most 
successful artists often playing the 
multiple roles of performing art-ist, writer, producer, and label head and taking on appellations like 
mogul and impresario.
394  rock I n’ o UTBad Boy. Although Diddy soon 
scored another distribution deal with Universal, he had already 
been dislodged from his position 
of dominance.
In 1998, 
c
ombs appeared at 
the number fifteen position on the annual Forbes magazine list of top earning entertainers, with reported annual earnings of $53.5 
million. Five places ahead of him, at number ten on the list, was one Percy Miller, a.k.a. Master P , whose reported earnings were $56.5 million. That year P , as he called himself, recorded his fourth album, the multiplatinum MP Da Last Don, which he claimed would be his last. 
n
ot be-
cause he was finished with hip hop—in fact, he kept recording—but because he wanted to build 
“the profile of a businessman, not a gangsta.”56 By then, P had built his n o Limit record store 
into a label and a multimedia empire that included the production team Beats by the Pound and 
P’s younger brothers, Silkk the Shocker and 
c
-Murder, as well as Mo B. Dick and Mia X, who 
also recorded collectively as T
r
U (The 
r
eal Untouchables). Master P had grown up in the 
c
alliope projects in 
n
ew 
o
rleans, a tough neighborhood in one of the country’s most violent 
cities; tales of crime and violence were commonplace in his music. 
n
o Limit’s first release,The 
Ghetto Is Trying to Kill Me—a straight-ahead gangsta rap album with hard beats, deep bass, and 
nc
-17 lyrics—became a substantial underground hit. Gangsta was now 
n
o Limit’s signature 
sound, and in 1998, Master P bought Snoop Dogg out of his Death 
r
ow contract and signed 
him to 
n
o Limit. Snoop returned the favor with “Still a G Thang” from Da Game Is to Be Sold, 
Not to Be Told, which debuted at number one.
As to his own career, Only God Can Judge Me (1999), P’s follow-up to MP Da Last Don, 
peaked at number two on the album charts; his chart position began to slip with Ghetto Post-
age (2000) and Game Face (2002). During this period, P had become an actor-writer-producer-director (co-starring in his own Miramax film, I Got the Hook-Up!), an author, and a sports agent (representing Derek Anderson of the 
c
leveland 
c
avaliers and 
r
on Mercer of the Boston 
c
eltics). In addition to 
n
o Limit 
r
ecords, 
n
o Limit Films, and 
n
o Limit Sports Enterprises, a 
n
o Limit clothing line (Soldier Gear) and a multimillion-dollar deal with 
c
onverse, Inc., com-
pleted the picture. Taken together, Miller and 
c
ombs presented a new hip hop image, what rap 
journalist Dan 
c
harnas has called “the embodiment of the superempowered artist, two one-
man brands” who fulfilled a vision of “self-determination and ownership—not just for hip-hop artists, not just for Black artists, but for all American artists.”
57 The era of the hip-hop mogul 
had arrivedWith significant tragedies along the way, Sean 
“Puffy” Combs (a.k.a. P . Diddy) parlayed his knowledge of street life and studio production 
into a successful hip hop empire.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 395
Listening Guide 35“I’ll Be Missing You” is a tribute to slain hip hop star Notorious B.I.G. 
(a.k.a. Biggie Smalls) written by his friend and mentor Puff Daddy (now known 
as Diddy), one of the richest and most successful men in the American music 
industry. Built on a sample from Sting’s hit “Every Breath You Take,” it fea-
tures Diddy, Biggie’s widow Faith Evans, and the Atlanta-based hip hop group 112. “I’ll Be Missing You” is a prime example of a hit song that references a specific event, which in turn opens up a world of cultural associations and 
thus forms an integral part of the informed listener’s experience of the song.
Musical Style Notes
Sampling, in which a digitized segment of a preexisting song is used as the basis for a new composition, is a well-known 
hip hop technique and one particularly associated with Puff Daddy/Diddy. The practice is not without controversy; while some look at it as a way of remaking or covering a successful pop song, others see it as a kind of culturally sanctioned 
plagiarism. But borrowing has a time-honored history in Western music, and both sampling and borrowing create multiple 
semiotic layers that affect the listener’s reception of the piece.
The layers and associations found in “I’ll Be Missing You” include the following:
● The introductory sample of Samuel Barber’s Adagio for Strings, used for countless 
movie tearjerkers.
● The omnipresent sample of Sting’s “Every Breath You Take,” with its compelling, repeti-tious bass line and its original, somewhat obsessive love lyric.
● The reference to gospel’s tradition of powerful death-and-redemption songs in the quote from “I’ll Fly Away,” sung at 4:51.
Musical “Road Map”
Timings Commen T s
0:00–2:14 A sample of a choral rendition of composer Samuel Barber’s Adagio for Strings, over which Puff Daddy narrates a memorial speech.
0:10 Vocal narration starts.
2:14–3:04 The sample of “Every Breath You Take” begins, the narration wraps up, and Puff Daddy begins the rap.
3:04–3:41 The beginning of the chorus overlaps with the last line of the rap. Chorus is singing, “Every breath 
you take.” The words have been changed, including the final line of the original, which is here changed to “I’ll be missing you.”
3:41–4:15 Sample continues; Puff Daddy raps.
4:15 Chorus returns with “Every Breath…” melody, again overlapping with the last line of the rap.
Over the chorus, Faith Evans (?) is singing an obbligato (additional) line: “I miss you....”yeah yeah
4:41 Chorus has been singing in unison; here they break into harmony at “what a life to take.”
4:47 Here the “Every Breath…” sample continues, but the sung melody breaks away with“somebody tell me why.”
4:51 Singers begin singing a line from the gospel song “I’ll Fly Away.”
5:07 Chorus begins the short, repetitive melodic phrase that also ends the original Sting song but with 
different words. As with the original, they are harmonizing at the interval of a “third” (two voices sing-ing a distance of three notes from one another).
5:17 Puff Daddy begins speaking again, while the chorus continues.
Track fades while Puff Daddy is speaking.“I’ll Be Missing You”
Artist:
 
Puff Daddy & 112
Music/Lyrics by Sean Combs  
(with samples from Sting’s “Every Breath You Take”)
Label:
 
Bad Boy (1997)396  rock I n’ o UTno Limit’s location in n ew o rleans highlighted another aspect 
of this new hip hop era: Production was no longer confined to 
n
ew 
York and Los Angeles. In 1992, 
n
elson George had written that “rap’s 
gone national and is in the process of going regional,”58 noting that a 
national audience had been getting some rap from regional sources: 
Miami (2 Live 
c
rew), Houston (Geto Boys), Seattle (Sir Mix-A-Lot), and San Francisco (Too 
Short). By the mid-1990s, the geography of hip hop also included the Midwest and what Tony 
Green referred to as the “Dirty South.”59 new o rleans boasted not only Master P’s n o Limit 
Army, but also Mystikal on Jive 
r
ecords; the 
c
ash Money label with Juvenile, B.G., Turk, 
and Lil’ Wayne (who recorded solo and collectively as the Hot Boys), and Big Tymers. The 
LaFace label (
o
ut
k
ast, Goodie Mob) and So So Def (Jermaine Dupri, Lil’ Bow Wow, Da Brat) 
were headquartered in Atlanta, where Def Jam opened a subsidiary in 2000 with Scarface as 
president and Ludacris as flagship artist. Timbaland and Magoo represented Virginia Beach, as Bone Thugs-
n
-Harmony did with 
c
leveland, and (later) as Eminem did with Detroit. A 
next generation of labels had sprouted in rap’s historical strongholds: Dr. Dre had launched Aftermath in Los Angeles; 
n
ew York boasted 
r
oc-A-Fella (Jay-Z) and 
r
uff 
r
yders (DMX). 
o
bserved Murray Forman:
Today the emphasis is on place, and groups explicitly advertise their home environments…or else 
they structure their home territory into titles and lyrics, constructing a new internally meaningful 
hip hop cartography….[P]roducers have also demonstrated a growing tendency to incorporate themselves as localised businesses (often buying or starting companies unrelated to the music in-dustry in their local neighborhoods…). Extending Nelson George’s observation, it now seems pos-sible to say that rap, having gone regional, is in the process of going local.
60
Puffy opened Justin’s r estaurant and hired Sister Souljah to run his $2 million Daddy’s House 
social programs. Master P started a basketball foundation for underprivileged youth and do-
nated $500,000 to keep open some schools and churches in his neighborhood.
To some extent, the decentralization of rap could be recognized in regional production 
styles. The 
n
ew York sound of the 1980s, as exemplified by the frenetic, layered sounds that 
the Bomb Squad produced for Public Enemy, represented the pace and density of 
n
ew York 
life. The more laid-back, bass-heavy productions of 
n
.W .A. in Los Angeles reflected a car cul-
ture that encouraged cruising and the use of powerful sound systems with deeper bass. By the 
release of Dr. Dre’s The Chronic (1992), the sound had been codified into the G-funk production style that emphasized slow beats underpinning lengthy samples of traditional late-1970s funk. Florida, also a car-centered society, favored deep, subwoofer bass sounds (referred to as booty bass or booty boom). After Biggie Smalls’s death, Bad Boy’s production style became softer, even 
more sample heavy, and pop-oriented. The gangsta style reasserted its primacy after Dr. Dre turned Eminem, the white rapper from Detroit, into the country’s most successful hip hop art-ist at the end of the decade.
Into the new millennium, the style that most defined the Dirty South was called bounce, 
as in Mystikal’s 2002 hit “Bouncin’ Back (Bumpin’ Me Against the Wall).” 
c
ommentators 
could agree that bounce was about dance beats, but they traced the style to different sources, including Luther 
c
ampbell’s booty bass in Miami. 
c
ampbell noted that “Miami is not really a No Limit’s location in New Orleans 
highlighted another aspect of this 
new hip hop era: Production was no 
longer confined to New York and Los 
Angeles.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 397Southern city; it’s a c aribbean city—Jamaicans, c ubans, Haitians, Puerto r icans, Bahamians. 
So what I did was add all those elements together.”61 British critic and bounce producer n ik 
c
ohn took bounce back to 1980s 
n
ew 
o
rleans, also in many ways a 
c
aribbean city. Said 
c
ohn: 
“Before Master P or 
c
ash Money, there was bounce. It started in the late 1980s, a wild mix of 
rap and Mardi Gras Indian chants and second line brass-band bass patterns and polyrhythmic 
drumming and gospel call-and-response.”62
Working in these regionally based styles and production centers, hip hop artists often 
operated as extended social groups—posses, crews, collectives of all types. At Bad Boy, it was 
called the Family; Master P built the 
n
o Limit Army; Snoop Dogg had Tha Dogg Pound; and 
Wu-Tang was a 
c
lan. This was confusing to a music industry structured around carefully 
parsed contracts and tracking of artists to determine chart position, market share, royalties, 
and so on. These loose alliances manifested themselves in the continual appearance of artists on each other’s recordings, sometimes across labels. To take just one example, “It’s All About the Benjamins” credited not only Puff Daddy and the Family, but also the 
n
otorious B.I.G., 
Lil’ 
k
im, the Lox, Dave Grohl, Perfect, FuzzBubble, and 
r
ob Zombie. 
c
oncert tours were an-
other arena where the collective impulses of hip hop were on display, from Bad Boy’s 
n
o Way 
o
ut tour, featuring Puffy and the entire Bad Boy Family, to 1999’s Hard 
k
nock Life tour—
 -
co-headlined by Jay-Z and DMX and also including the duo of Method Man and 
r
edman and 
DJ 
c
lue—to the successful (and controversial) Up in Smoke tour (2000), which reached an 
unprecedented crossover audience with a lineup that featured Snoop Dogg, Ice 
c
ube, M
c
 
r
en, 
Dr. Dre, and Dre’s protégé, Eminem.
Perhaps the most collective operation in rap was Staten Island, 
n
ew York’s Wu-Tang 
c
lan. Wu-Tang was consciously assembled as a loose confederation of M
c
s—
r
ZA, 
 
Genius 
(GZA), 
o
l’ Dirty Bastard (
o
DB), Method Man, 
r
aekwon the 
c
hef, Ghostface 
k
illah, 
 
U-God, 
Inspectah Deck, and Masta 
k
illa—who performed collectively as Wu-Tang 
c
lan and also 
 
recorded as solo artists. Started by Genius (GZA) and 
o
l’ Dirty Bastard, it was the musical 
genius of GZA’s cousin, producer 
r
ZA (pronounced 
r
izza)—whose signature sound of menac-
ing beats, sparse samples, and surrealistic soundscapes underpinned the group’s violent martial 
arts humor—that enabled Wu-Tang to realize its vision. Following their success with Enter the 
Wu-Tang: 36 allowing individual members to record solo with anyone and any label.
After many solo projects and the release of their second group effort, Wu-Tang Clan 
Forever (1997), the group had achieved major crossover success, coupled with business ventures 
that included a clothing line (Wu Wear), a video game for Playstation (Wu-Tang: Shaolin Style), and a comic book ( The Nine Rings of Wu-Tang). Indeed, according to Dan 
c
harnas, the business 
strategy of the Wu-Tang 
c
lan, mainly pursued by 
r
ZA, importantly prefigured that of future 
moguls like Puff Daddy or Master P:
The members of the Wu weren’t branded like property with label logos. Quite the opposite: The 
labels themselves sought out the mark of the “W .” The Wu-Tang logo, like the “rough, rugged, and raw” production style of the RZA, became a valuable emblem of authenticity, worth millions of dollars to any company that bought into the Wu franchise.
63
By the end of 2000, the c lan was hard at work on a new group project, The W, with all the orig-
inal members except 
o
DB, then a fugitive from a court-ordered drug rehabilitation program. 398  rock I n’ o UT(He still appeared on the album, via previously recorded rhymes.) The full c lan—minus o DB, 
who was now in jail—assembled again in 2001 to record their fourth group album, Iron Flag. 
It wasn’t until 2007 that Wu Tang 
c
lan recorded another full studio album. By then 
o
DB had 
died of a heart attack.
Wu-Tang’s example testified that even 
n
ew York rap—still the epitome of “hard-core”—
had become significantly more decentralized. In its rundown of the fifty most influential hip 
hop players, Rolling Stone identified the particular borough or ’hood that each 
n
ew York artist 
“represented”—Beastie Boys (Manhattan), Busta 
r
hymes (Brooklyn), 
kr
S-
o
ne (the Bronx), 
Mase (Harlem), Wu-Tang 
c
lan (Staten Island), etc.64 Puff Daddy and his Bad Boy empire had 
gotten most of the notoriety, but 
r
ussell Simmons had parlayed Def Jam (LL 
c
ool J, Method 
Man, 
r
edman, Foxy Brown) into a multimedia empire that included film (The Nutty Professor), 
television (Def Comedy Jam), a clothing line (Phat Farm), and distribution deals with 
r
oc-A-
Fella and 
r
uff 
r
yders, home to Jay-Z (Brooklyn) and DMX (Yonkers), respectively. Simmons 
also ventured into political territory with the Hip Hop Summit Action 
n
etwork, begun in 
2001, which took on issues such as freedom of speech and social injustice as well as political campaigns like voter registration and reforming punitive drug laws. Such efforts showcased the positive activities of hip hop nation but were seldom reported with the same gusto as the sensationalized acts of violence.
Gangsta rap was the ruling model for the most publicized rap 
of the day. Unlike the rappers who had dominated 
n
ew York, from 
 r
un-D.M.
c
. to Public Enemy—all college graduates from middle-
class backgrounds (even Puff Daddy attended Howard 
 
University)—
the new rap stars had gone to the school of hard knocks. Their 
frustrations were often directed toward each other in verbal jousts that extended the logic of the feud between Biggie and Tupac, in 
which rappers battled over reputation, territory, and claims about who was the most “real.” In the aftermath of Biggie Smalls’s death, rappers 
n
as and Jay-Z sparred repeatedly for 
n
ew 
York’s rap throne.
The son of jazz musician 
o
lu Dara, 
n
as (born 
n
asir Jones) evoked the harsh reality of 
street life in the Queensbridge projects on his major label debut, Illmatic. Jay-Z, from 
 
Brooklyn’s 
Marcy projects, was a promising student who found himself immersed in the seamier side of 
street life until rap showed him a way out. His debut album, Reasonable Doubt  (1996), a classic 
of the genre, is often compared to 
n
as’s Illmatic. 
n
as enjoyed a steady stream of hits by some 
of the best producers in the business—“If I 
r
uled the World” (the Trackmasters), “Hate Me 
n
ow” (Puff Daddy), “
n
as Is Like” (DJ Premier), and “You 
o
we Me” (Timbaland)—before his 
career started to go into decline. Sensing weakness, Jay-Z called 
n
as out on “Takeover,” to 
which 
n
as responded on “Ether” (from Stillmatic, 2001), which then prompted Jay-Z’s “Super 
Ugly.” Though the release of Stillmatic represented something of a comeback, 
n
as never quite 
regained his undisputed prominence in 
n
ew York rap. Jay-Z, on the other hand, became so suc-
cessful that his 
r
oc-A-Fella label (founded with Damon Dash) became a corporate empire with 
its own talent roster (Beanie Sigel, 
c
am’ron, M.
o
.P .), a stable of in-house producers (Just Blaze, 
k
anye West), a clothing line (
r
oca Wear), and a film division (Paid in Full, State Property). Even 
with all this commercial success, Jay-Z never lost his focus on the music.Unlike the rappers who had dominated 
New York, from Run-D.M.C. to Public 
 
Enemy—all college graduates from 
 
middle-class backgrounds (even Puff 
Daddy attended Howard University)—the new rap stars had gone to the school of hard knocks.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 399Jay-Z had hit his stride on Vol. 2…Hard Knock Life, part of a trilogy bracketed by In My 
Life, Vol. 1 (1997) and Vol. 3…Life and Times of S. Carter (1999). For Vol. 2, he featured numerous 
fellow rappers, including DMX and Ja 
r
ule, while collaborating with some of the best-known 
producers in the business such as Puffy and Teddy 
r
iley, whose memorable, radio-friendly 
hooks generated a string of hit singles such as “Hard 
k
nock Life (Ghetto Anthem).” He scaled 
back somewhat for 2000’s The Dynasty: Roc la Familia, which primarily featured 
 r
oc-A-Fella’s 
in-house rappers. The album hit number one and went platinum. For The 
 
Blueprint (2001), there 
was only one guest shot—Eminem on “
r
enegade.” Propelled by demand for “Izzo (H.
o
.V .A.),” 
one of the hottest singles of the year, The Blueprint went to number one and multiplatinum cer-
tification. From that point, his musical, personal, and business successes (marriage to 
 
Beyoncé 
k
nowles, ascension to the presidency of Def Jam) all seemed of a piece. After recording The 
Black Album (2003), Jay-Z announced his intention to retire. It didn’t last. By 2005, he was 
 
recording again and attending to all aspects of his new executive position, which he left in 2008 
to rededicate himself to his music career.
Another leading 
n
ew York rapper, DMX (from Yonkers) spent part of his childhood 
in several group homes and by his early teens was no stranger to the criminal justice sys-tem. Touré described his hard-bitten style: “He raps in the roughest and grimiest voice in hip hop, the sound of gravel hitting the grave. His records speak of death constantly, crime casually, moral consequences occasionally.”
65 His first two albums for Def Jam, It’s Dark and 
Hell Is Hot (1998) and Flesh of My Flesh, both debuted at number one on the Billboard 200  
in the same year—a first for any artist, hip hop or otherwise. His 2000 entry, …And Then 
There Was X, entered the charts at number one, eventually selling 5 million copies. By then, 
he had had major supporting roles in the Jet Li action film Romeo Must Die and Steven Seagal’s Exit Wounds.  The Great Depression (2001) was his fourth straight album to debut at 
number one.
DMX’s success marked the entry of producer Irv Gotti, formerly Jay-Z’s DJ. Gotti 
started out as Irv Lorenzo, a small-time drug dealer from Hollis, Queens, the neighborhood that spawned Def Jam founder 
r
ussell Simmons and 
r
un-D.M.
c
. Because he acted like a boss, 
Jay-Z had called him Gotti, after the 
n
ew York crime boss, and the name stuck. It was Gotti 
who brought DMX and Ja 
r
ule to Def Jam and helped restore the label’s glory, and who 
launched Ashanti’s career. Gotti produced what he called “chick records…records that niggas 
ain’t mad at and women love.”66 Examples include “What’s Luv” (Fat Joe and Ashanti), “Fool-
ish” (Ashanti), “Baby” (Ashanti), “ Ain’t It Funny” (Jennifer Lopez and Ja 
r
ule), and “Down for 
You” (Ja 
r
ule, 
c
harli Baltimore, Vita, and Ashanti).
In 1997, Gotti formed a joint venture with Def Jam, which he called, fittingly, 
 
Murder, 
Inc., and signed Ja 
r
ule as its flagship artist. After an early, DMX-style success with 
Venni Vetti Vecci (1999), Gotti took Ja in a more pop direction, perfecting the formula on 
Ja’s third album, Pain Is Love (2001), which featured collaborations with Jennifer Lopez (“I’m 
r
eal”) and Ashanti (“ Always on Time”). The move toward pop added measurably to Ja 
r
ule’s crossover appeal but cost him at street level. DMX attacked him relentlessly in the 
press. Ja 
 
retaliated with “Fuck with Us” from his fourth album, The Last Temptation (2002). 
By this time, Ja 
r
ule had become one of the most financially successful rap artists of the 
early 2000s.400  rock I n’ o UTThe combined commercial momentum of rap and the new r&b led to a landmark in the 
history of the charts: 
o
n 
o
ctober 11, 2003, Billboard reported that, for the first time in 
the magazine’s history, all ten of the Top Ten pop hits in the country were by black artists, 
nine of them rappers, with Beyoncé at number one with “Baby Boy.” 
c
ritic 
n
elson George 
was quick to claim the ultimate victory. “The battle’s been won,” said George. “Hip-hop is the 
new 
 
American music.’’67 What happened was that hip hop singles had made the transition from 
 
urban radio to Top Forty radio, which reflected the broadest demographic and formed the 
 
basis 
for the 
 
Billboard Hot 100  chart. But the Hot 100 is more heavily weighted to radio play than to 
sales; the Billboard 200, the mainstream album chart, reflects the bulk of sales. Had black artists 
captured the Top Ten album positions, George’s statement would have been unassailable. Still, he was correct that even the hardest rappers had become more oriented toward the crossover market and that hip hop aesthetics had exerted a defining influence on other styles, from teen pop to r&b. Artists like Bubba Sparxxx and 
n
appy 
r
oots even offered country rap. In that 
sense, hip hop had become “the new American music” or, at the very least, a new paradigm that may have surpassed rock in cultural importance.
If any single artist owned 2003, it was 50 
c
ent, whose rise in many ways marked the 
culmination of rap’s embrace of gangster capitalism. He also epitomized the extent to which 
a rap artist’s credibility derived as much from his backstory as his rapping skills. According 
to street lore, 50 
c
ent—born 
c
urtis Jackson in Hollis, Queens—became a second-generation 
crack dealer at age twelve, earning up to $5,000 a day. At twenty-four he was shot nine times at point-blank range; one of the bullets pierced his jaw, producing his signature slur on record. With street cred like that, it’s no wonder that the bidding for his contract reached a reported $1 million when Eminem and Dr. Dre signed him to the Shady/Aftermath label. He gained fur-ther notoriety from a widely publicized feud with Ja 
r
ule and Murder, Inc., that spilled into his 
first album on his new label. Get Rich or Die Tryin’ went double platinum in three weeks, largely on the strength of the Dr. Dre–produced party anthem, “In Da 
c
lub.” The album also included 
“Back Down,” part of a continuing salvo of insult songs directed at Ja 
r
ule. Ja responded with 
“Loose 
c
hange,” on which he took on 50 
c
ent, Eminem, and Dre. 
r
eportedly, Ja 
r
ule’s crew 
also stabbed 50 
c
ent at the Hit Factory. Eminem, 50 
c
ent, and Busta 
r
hymes then verbally 
ganged up on Ja 
r
ule, setting new rhymes to the instrumental track of Tupac’s “Hail Mary.” Ja 
fired back with “Guess Who Shot Ya.”
c
ontroversy continued to surround 50 
c
ent—most notably in connection with his pos -
sible role in the 2002 execution-style murder of Jam Master Jay (of 
r
un-D.M.
c
.)—but the rap-
per proceeded unchecked as he sought to brand himself in the manner of predecessors Diddy, Master P , Jay-Z, and Wu Tang. His G-Unit clothing line became a success on a scale compara-ble to Wu-Wear or 
r
ocawear, and in 2004 he formed a landmark deal with an upstart soft drink 
called Vitamin Water, insisting that his signature “Formula 50” be grape flavored because “no-body drank wild flavors like strawberry and kiwi in the ’hood.”
68
As the hip hop brand continued to grow, some in the industry took action against black 
dominance on the pop charts. In February 2005, Billboard introduced a new singles chart, the 
Pop 100. The Hot 100 had Billboard ’s pop singles chart since 1958; it was the chart that the 
radio program American Top 40 had used to create its weekly playlist from 1970 to 1995. It HEAR MORE
Audio links for 
 
Billboard Top Ten 
Singles, October 11, 2003, on MySearchLab rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 401remained Billboard ’s main chart for tabulating the most popular individual songs. What, then, 
was the Pop 100? The answer began to emerge after one noticed that every record to reach 
number one on the Hot 100 in 2004 was by a black artist (see the table). Simply put, the Pop 
100 was created to remedy this situation.
BILLBOARD  n umber o ne Ho T  100 s ingles (2004) 
sT
ar
T
ing Da
T
e a
T
 
n
umber 
o
ne
s
ong
a
r
T
is
T
January 3 “Hey Ya!” OutKast
February 14 “The Way You Move” OutKast featuring
Sleepy Brown
February 21 “Slow Jamz” Twista featuring Kanye
West and Jamie Foxx
February 28 “Yeah!” Usher featuringLil’ Jon and Ludacris
May 22 “Burn” Usher
July 10 “I Believe” Fantasia
July 17 “Burn” Usher
July 24 “Confessions Part II” Usher
August 7 “Slow Motion” Juvenile featuring
Soulja Slim
August 21 “Lean Back” The Terror Squad
September 11 “Goodies” Ciara featuring PeteyPablo
October 30 “My Boo” Usher and Alicia Keys
December 11 “Drop It Like It’s Hot” Snoop Dogg featuring Pharrell
The Hot 100 was based on sales and airplay data from all radio formats; the Pop 100 
 
limited its data collection to a narrower range of mainstream Top 40 stations, to track 
what Billboard called “mass-appeal mainstream hits”—as if that phrase didn’t describe rap.69 
 
Explained journalist and music librarian Bill Lamb, “By the beginning of the new century, many fans and members of the music industry became concerned that the Hot 100 had become 
biased in favor of r&b and hip hop music. It was becoming more and more difficult for rock and 
mainstream pop songs to do well on the Hot 100.”
70 The runaway success of rap and hip hop 
had allowed many street-toughened black entrepreneurs to become multimillionaires on their 
own terms, and this challenged narrow mainstream conceptions of the American Dream. Thus, 
the Pop 100 was designed to give white artists in pop, rock, and country a better chance to 
claim a number one hit song.
Ironically, the first song to hit number one on the new Pop 100 chart was 
c
iara’s “1, 2 
Step,” a dance-oriented r&b/hip hop single featuring Missy Elliott. Still, the new chart en -
abled 
k
elly 
c
larkson’s “Since U Been Gone” to top the year-end recap. 
o
ther than that, the HEAR MORE
Audio links for Billboard 
number one Hot 100 singles for 2004 on MySearchLab402  rock I n’ o UTtwo charts were remarkably similar because rap and r&b/hip hop had 
already made inroads into Top 40 radio territory and because many white artists had adopted hip hop aesthetics and rap styles. After four 
years of maintaining the separate charts, Billboard finally realized the 
error of its ways and pulled the plug on the Pop 100 in June 2009. It was clear that pop success could no longer be limited by race or genre and that the importance of hip hop aesthetics for artists of all persua-sions had simply become a fact of cultural life.
Diversifying Hip Hop
When Time magazine announced the existence of a “Hip Hop n ation” on its February 8, 
1999, cover, it featured a photo not of Sean 
c
ombs or Master P , Jay-Z or Wu-Tang. Instead, 
the face of Lauryn Hill stood for hip hop’s growing legitimacy. Hill wrote poetry, played 
high school basketball, ran track, and was a cheerleader and homecoming queen. She went 
to 
c
olumbia University and continued to work with childhood friends Wyclef Jean and 
Prakazrel (“Pras”) Michel as a member of the Fugees, whose The Score (1996)—at 17 mil-lion units—was the best-selling hip hop album ever. Propelled by Hill’s infectious vocal on the cover of “
k
illing Me Softly,” The Score was the socially conscious hip hop album of the 
year with its combination of deep beats and insightful commentary juxtaposed against an incredible musicality. Throughout, Hill continued to work with the 
r
efugee Project, which 
she started in 1996 to assist underprivileged and at-risk youth. Before launching her solo career, however, she took time off when her son, Zion—whose father is Bob Marley’s son 
r
ohan—was born.
The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill (1998) was Hill’s solo debut—a big band jazz–meets–
hip hop extravaganza incorporating soul, rap, reggae, and hip hop. In 1999, it earned her 
the 
 
Album of the Year and the Best 
n
ew Artist, 
r
&B Song, 
r
&B Album, and 
r
&B Vocal 
 
Performance Grammys. 
c
ritical praise was unequivocal. Hill’s largely autobiographical work 
touched on 
 
issues from racism and sexism to spirituality and self-confession, eliciting compari-
sons to touchstone works such as Marvin Gaye’s What’s Goin’ On and Joni Mitchell’s Blue. In addition to the warmth and sensitivity of her vocals, Hill also brought considerable savvy to the album as producer and grace to the Grammy Awards. Still, she had no illusions about the music industry. “This is a very sexist industry,” she exclaimed. “They’ll never throw the genius title to a sister. They’ll just call her ‘diva’ and think it’s a compliment. It’s like our flair and van-
ity are put before our musical and intellectual contributions.”
71
Hill was one of several women rappers who rose to fame from the mid-1990s onward. 
Foxy Brown, Lil’ 
k
im, and 
c
harli Baltimore—the latter two of whom were lovers and proté-
gés of Biggie Smalls—hailed from 
n
ew York. Missy “Misdemeanor” Elliot presided over her 
own record-company empire in Virginia. Eve, a former stripper from Philadelphia, became the 
lone woman in the 
r
uff 
r
yders crew. Da Brat, from 
c
hicago, signed with Jermaine Dupri’s 
So So Def in Atlanta. Solé came from 
k
ansas 
c
ity, and Mia-X was discovered by Master P 
in 
n
ew 
o
rleans. Most of these rappers paid homage to their elder sisters, like Queen Latifah, 
but started out taking a much more over-the-top sexualized approach—Hill being a notable After four years of maintaining the sep-
arate charts, 
b
illboard finally realized 
the error of its ways and pulled the plug 
on the Pop 100 in June 2009. It was 
clear that pop success could no longer be limited by race or genre and that the importance of hip hop aesthetics for 
artists of all persuasions had simply be-
come a fact of cultural life.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 403exception. r eferred to early on as hard-edged harlots and 
the reigning divas of raunch, these women rappers have 
been celebrated and criticized not only for their street-
tough raps and 
nc
-17 lyrics, but also their stage outfits 
and demeanor that leave little to the imagination.
Before breaking away from the pack as an artist, 
Missy Elliott had established herself as a notable writer 
and producer, owning her own company, the Gold Mine, and working alongside producer and friend Timbaland to create hits for other artists (such as “
o
ne in a Million” for Aaliyah). As a rapper, she hit plati-
num on her first outing, Supa Dupa’ Fly (1997), and more than held her own with Da Real World (1999), which attempted to reclaim the word bitch as a positive term. “Elliott doesn’t sling the 
b-word around in the misogynistic way of her male hip hop cohorts,” said Vanessa Jones. “In-
stead, Elliott reclaims it, making it the description of choice for strong women.”
72 From there, 
the hits just kept coming (in part thanks to Timbaland’s appeal-
ing dance grooves): “She’s a Bitch” and “Hot Boyz” from Da Real 
World; “Get Ur Freak 
o
n” and “
o
ne Minute Man” from Miss E … 
So Addictive (2001); and “Work It” from Under Construction (2002). 
If she could be criticized for retreating into a formula mentality on This Is Not a Test (2003), she returned the focus to her skills as a rapper and songwriter on The Cookbook (2005). Elliott’s vocal tal-ents—she is a consummate rapper and an able soul singer—have made her one of the few artists to span the worlds of rap, r&b/hip hop, and electronic dance music. Her artistry creates a rap that is hard, sexy, playful, and danceable, unencumbered by the encroachments of the thug life.
Lauryn Hill and Missy, in their different ways, circumvented the gangster imperative 
that ruled hip hop in the nineties. Another rap newcomer, Eminem, took some of the prevail-
ing conventions of the gangster persona—the masculine bravado, unchecked violence, and valorization of the “hood”—and pushed them to the point of absurdity. That Eminem was white and from Detroit, not then known as a hotbed of rap activity, made his maneuvers all the more attention getting. In effect, Eminem was the sardonic, self-conscious product of a cultural shift described by Spin magazine critic 
c
harles Aaron: “Sometime after the death of 
n
irvana’s 
k
urt 
c
obain, the hip-hop kid—oversized clothes, syrupy slang, skateboard double-
parked outside—emerged as the nineties embodiment of youthful, white alienation.”73 Judged 
in this light, Eminem’s rise was prefigured as much by the rage-fueled, rap-metal hybrid pur-
veyed by nineties bands like 
k
orn and Limp Bizkit as it was by white rap predecessors like the 
Beastie Boys.With a successful career in front of and behind the mixing 
board, Missy Elliott established herself as a writer, rapper, singer, and woman to be reckoned with.
Elliott’s vocal talents—she is a consummate 
rapper and an able soul singer—have made her one of the few artists to span the worlds 
of rap, r&b/hip hop, and electronic dance 
music. Her artistry creates a rap that is hard, sexy, playful, and danceable, unencumbered by the encroachments of the thug life.
404  rock I n’ o UTEminem quit school in the ninth grade, fathered 
a child, and lived with Hailie and her mother, 
k
im, in a 
crack-ridden Detroit neighborhood. Although white, he 
was not a child of privilege. His independently released 
1997 Slim Shady EP drew the attention of Dr. Dre. In 
1999, the duo worked together on the full-length Slim Shady LP, which entered the charts at number two and was certified three times platinum before the year was out. Slim Shady was the alter ego that allowed Eminem to take revenge on the world, killing his mother, kill-
ing the mother of his child, getting even with the high school bully who beat him up, ripping Pamela Anderson’s breasts off, and taking every drug imaginable at the same time. For his sec-
ond outing, Eminem came out from behind his Slim Shady persona to assume his real identity on The Marshall Mathers LP (2000). With material as venomous as his first album, Marshall 
Mathers sold 7 million copies in its first year.
The overwhelming commercial successes of Slim Shady and Marshall Mathers outraged 
many observers of the cultural scene. “When Ice-T sang about murdering a cop, he got dropped from his record label,” wrote 
r
enée Graham. “When Eminem raps about butcher-
ing his wife and brutalizing homosexuals, he gets a Grammy nod for album of the year.”74 
Some believed that a double standard was being applied—one for black artists and another 
for white. Yet for others, Eminem’s hardscrabble background legitimated him, just as it did 
for Biggie Smalls and would do for 50 
c
ent. Portraying a loosely fictionalized version of 
himself in the 2002 movie 8 Mile, he used his self-proclaimed “white trash” status as the basis 
for a modern day hip hop rags-to-riches tale in which class, not race, became the burden to be overcome. Eight years later, he would return to this theme of overcoming adversity on his 
 
album Recovery (2010), in this case the troubles arising from his much-publicized struggle 
with addiction.
o
ther rappers—black and male—more consciously moved away from, or at least sub-
stantially revised, the testosterone-drenched tendencies of the era. Ludacris aspired to pop rap mass appeal on his third album, Word of Mouf (2001), where he modulated his gangsta style (if 
not his sexism) with subtlety and humor on the single “ Area 
c
odes.” Born in Jamaica but raised 
in Brooklyn, Shaggy—whose Hot Shot was the second most popular album of 2001—was the 
antithesis of the 
n
ew York gangsta: polite, well mannered, and com-
pletely nonthreatening. St. Louis-based 
n
elly’s laid-back Southern 
drawl, tongue-twister rhymes, and infectious pop hooks propelled Nellyville (2002) straight to number one, where it stayed for seven weeks. Even with some (minimal) gangsta posturing, he did nothing HEAR MORE
Eminem on 
MySearchLabThe fact that Eminem achieved both commercial success  
and critical acclaim with violent, misogynistic rhymes  outraged many.
Other rappers—black and male—more 
consciously moved away from, or at least substantially revised, the testos-
terone-drenched tendencies of the era.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 405that would risk losing any portion of his vast pop audience; his duet with Justin Timberlake 
(“Work It”) served only to consolidate his teen base.
Atlanta’s 
o
ut
k
ast did not reject gangsterism outright but inhabited a different form of 
it. As described by Ann Powers in the New York Times, “This is gangster rap as a complicated 
worldview, not just a macho stance.”75 By Stankonia  (2000) , o ut k ast had already enjoyed a run 
of hit singles and platinum sales, melding Southern street savvy with a psychedelic funk sound 
that owed much to the 1970s innovations of George 
c
linton’s Parliament-Funkadelic. Speaker -
boxxx/The Love Below (2003), the follow-up, won three Grammys including Album of the Year, 
a first for a rap group. 
o
ne of the few hip hop albums to be certified diamond (10 million units 
sold), Speakerboxxx/The Love Below was essentially two albums: the first, a Big Boi compilation 
that continued 
o
ut
k
ast’s adventurous Dirty South hip hop; the second, an eccentric André 
3000 (a.k.a. Dré) foray into funk and soul. Each 
c
D generated a number one hit single—Big 
Boi’s “The Way You Move” and André’s “Hey Ya!,” which became one of the standout singles 
of the year.
A different shift in the prevailing image of hip hop came when producer 
k
anye West 
stepped out from behind the mixing board and became rapper 
k
anye West. West was not your 
average M
c
. Looking like someone from the pages of GQ in his pink Polo shirts and Gucci 
loafers; he graced the cover of Time magazine before Rolling Stone pictured him as 
c
hrist with 
a crown of thorns. His collegiate appearance—defined through a series of album titles that 
played upon going to college, from College Dropout (2004) to Late Registration (2005) to Gradu-ation (2007)—gave rise to the phenomenon known as backpack rap, a movement known for its lyrical sophistication, concern with social issues (in which guise it was also referred to as “con-scious rap”), and relatively mild-mannered personae. Despite his apparent refinement, West courted contro-versy as much as his gangster counterparts, albeit often for different reasons. He stirred debate at a benefit for Hurricane 
k
atrina victims, where he launched into an 
antigovernment rant that climaxed with the pronounce-ment that “George Bush doesn’t care about black peo-ple.” West also spoke out against homophobia in rap in an MTV interview.
West built his reputation as a producer with Bad 
Boy and 
r
oc-A-Fella, working with top-tier artists like 
Alicia 
k
eys, Twista, Ludacris, and Jay-Z. But when he 
told his colleagues at 
r
oc-A-Fella that he wanted to rap, 
his request was first met with an awkward standoffish -
ness. “It was obvious we were not from the same place 
An unlikely hip hop hero in his upscale, preppy attire, 
Kanye West proved to be a top-selling rapper and an 
 outspoken political commentator.
406  rock I n’ o UTor cut from the same cloth,” said Jay-Z. “We all grew up street guys who had to do whatever we 
had to do to get by. Then there’s 
k
anye, who to my knowledge has never hustled a day in his 
life. I didn’t see how it could work.”76 Fearing that one of their hottest producers might jump 
labels, 
r
oc-A-Fella signed West. His first effort, The College Dropout (2004), debuted at number 
two and sold nearly 3 million copies; West received ten Grammy nominations for that album 
and won three.
Subsequent albums built on that success while expanding West’s artistic range. 
o
n 
808s and Heartbreak (2008), West recorded an emotionally dark album infused with the grief 
prompted by the death of his mother, Donda West. With a cold, electro-pop sound and heavy reliance on the vocal software Auto-Tune, the album left many listeners confused but still man-aged to go platinum, and lead single “Heartless” would spend twenty-nine weeks on the charts, peaking at number two. My Beautiful, Dark, Twisted Fantasy was a sprawling artistic 
 
statement 
featuring unlikely samples (
k
ing 
c
rimson’s “Twenty-first 
c
entury Schizoid Man,” Black 
 
Sabbath’s “Iron Man”) and guest appearances (Bon Iver, Elton John), and debuted at number 
one upon its December 2010 release.
Gangster themes and imagery did not disappear from the rap world despite the rising 
popularity of West and other hip hop artists who presented a softer take on the genre. 
o
ne 
of the twenty-first century’s most prominent rappers, Lil Wayne, first gained notoriety in the mid-1990s as a pint-sized preteen from 
n
ew 
o
rleans calling himself Gangsta D. Signed 
with the 
c
ash Money label, he took on the moniker Lil Wayne—adapted from his birth name, 
Dwayne Michael 
c
arter, Jr.—in 1997, issuing his solo debut, Tha Block Is Hot, in 1999. He truly 
made his reputation, though, on a prolific series of underground “mix tapes” that he used as a testing ground, through which he refined his skills to the point that his claim to be the “best rapper alive” (made on his 2004 single, “Bring It Back”) came across as more than the usual hip hop hyperbole.
77 Starting with Tha Carter in 2004, Wayne’s pop appeal gained a momentum 
that solidified when Tha Carter III entered the charts at number one in the summer of 2008. A 
much-publicized stint at 
n
ew York’s 
r
ikers Island on weapons charges did not halt his com-
mercial rise. An EP released while in prison, I Am Not a Human Being, took only three weeks to 
reach number one, while his first proper post-prison album, the widely anticipated Tha Carter IV, also quickly reached the top position and finished 2011 as Billboard ’s top r&b/hip-hop al-
bum of the year. Wayne placed fifth in the year’s list of top-selling pop artists overall.
Lil Wayne was also perhaps the top rap empire builder to have emerged in the twenty-
first century. In 2003, he founded his own label, Young Money, an imprint of 
c
ash Money 
(which by then was distributed by Universal Music). As Wayne’s own success grew, so too did that of the label. 
c
anadian rapper Drake became the first Young Money artist other than Lil 
Wayne to have an album reach number one with his 2010 release, Thank Me Later. Formerly an 
actor best known for his role on the 
c
anadian teen soap, Degrassi: The Next Generation, Drake 
was an artist more in the mold of 
k
anye West, known for his sensitivity rather than his swag-
ger. 
r
eviewing the release for the indie webzine Pitchfork, 
r
yan Dombai observed, “Thank Me 
Later presents its star as a bottle-serviced hip-hop headcase tirelessly searching for love and good times while caught up in his own thoughts….Which all seems very Boy Who 
c
ried Pent-
house Suite except that Drake manages to make his plight tugging and relatable thanks to a 
potent mix of empathy, candidness, and grandeur.”78 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 407Lacking nothing in the way of swagger was 
n
icki Minaj, another Young Money artist who capi -
talized on the notoriety gained from a series of song-
stealing guest appearances on tracks by Lil Wayne, 
k
anye West, and others to be the best-selling female 
rap artist of 2011. Fashioning herself as a style icon 
who combined the voluptuous curves of a Barbie doll with the outlandish colors and daring outfits of a Japanese anime character, Minaj embodied a spirit of self-reinvention shared with contemporary 
 
female 
artists such as 
k
aty Perry and Lady Gaga. Pink 
 
Friday, her debut album, went to number one in Feb-
ruary 2011 and spawned three top twenty singles, including “Super Bass” and “Moment 4 Life,” a duet with Drake. Its successor, Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded (an entirely different release despite the similar title), debuted at number one upon its April 2012 release. Summing up her achieve-ments to date, Jon 
c
araminica claimed in the New York Times, “She became a nimble, evocative 
rapper. She became an intricate lyricist. She became a thoughtful singer. She became a risky 
performer. She invented new personae. More than any other rapper in the mainstream, she pushed hard against expectations, and won.”
79 Her efforts to position herself somewhere be-
tween hardcore rap and commercial dance pop left some listeners frustrated—she drew head-
lines after withdrawing from a Summer Jam sponsored by 
n
ew York radio station Hot 97 
when a DJ denounced her for not creating “real hip-hop”—but her quick rise made 2012 “a 
more exciting time to be a female rapper than a male one.”80
Women on the Rise
What was said of n icki could be said of women artists more generally: by 2012, there seemed 
to be more exciting opportunities for female pop stars than male ones. In strictly commercial 
terms, women artists dominated the Billboard  list of year-end, top-selling artists every year 
from 2009–2011. More than sales were at issue though, for female pop stars of the era were 
also expanding the range of acceptable representations attached to women artists, albeit still within certain limits of what was considered culturally appropriate. Lady Gaga went furthest in pushing the envelope of pop femininity, but others—including Adele and Beyoncé—also made significant moves in this direction.
The unconventional and provocative Nicki Minaj took the 
world of hip hop by storm, hitting platinum sales with her first album release. She is pictured with collaborator Lil 
Wayne (left) and Tyga on her way to the 2011 Grammy 
Awards.408  rock I n’ o UTThis wave of successful female pop artists had been 
building for nearly two decades. Its roots, in a sense, could be 
traced back to a development that had accompanied and paral-
leled the growth of alternative music in the early 1990s. 
r
iot 
Grrrl was a determinedly underground movement associated 
most strongly with the indie stronghold of 
o
lympia, Washing-
ton, whose adherents—which included 
k
athleen Hanna; Tobi 
Vail and 
k
athi Wilcox of Bikini 
k
ill; and Alison Wolfe, Molly 
n
euman, and Erin Smith of Bratmobile—purposely resisted 
the larger media industry efforts to appropriate alternative music and culture. 
n
onetheless, it 
opened a space for the critique of male-dominated music scenes and the promotion of women 
as artists who deserved and demanded space to represent themselves that had wider repercus-
sions than record sales alone could measure.81 Its emergence coincided with that of less ag-
gressively oppositional female performers out of the alternative scene like Hole (led by 
k
urt 
c
obain’s future wife, 
c
ourtney Love), PJ Harvey, and Liz Phair—the latter of whom graced 
the cover of a 1994 Rolling Stone issue that contained a special section on “Women in 
r
ock,” an-
nouncing the first of several moments throughout the 1990s during which women’s success in 
popular music was deemed newsworthy enough to amount to a trend.
That women’s success in the worlds of rock and pop is considered trend worthy by the 
dominant media is due to the continued existence of gender inequality. Although women com-prise over 50 percent of the population, they are underrepresented in the upper reaches of most fields of endeavor, including popular music. While the success of individual female artists is easily contained within the routine workings of the popular music star system, the success of numbers of female artists at once strikes the public as a more unusual development and 
so tends to generate attention. The Boston Globe’s Steve Morse identified this trend twice in the 1990s—once, when he declared: “Time to call 1996 what it was: pop music’s Year of the Woman,”
82 and then again in 1999, as women swept the Grammy Awards.
Women also did very well in the intervening years. Initially, Morse noted not only the 
superstar entries of Alanis Morissette’s Jagged Little Pill, 1996’s best-selling album, and 
c
eline 
Dion’s multiplatinum Falling into You, but also the impact of lesser-known artists like Joan 
o
sborne, 
n
atalie Merchant, Ani DiFranco, Tori Amos, Suzanne Vega, and Shawn 
c
olvin, as 
well as women fronting mixed-gender groups such as Delores 
o
’
r
iordan (
c
ranberries), Gwen 
Stefani (
n
o Doubt), and Lauryn Hill (Fugees). In fact, the six best-selling albums of 1996 were 
by women or woman-fronted groups: Morissette’s Jagged Little Pill , Dion’s Falling into You, 
Mariah 
c
arey’s Daydream, the Fugees’ The Score, Shania Twain’s The Woman in Me, and the all-
female soundtrack to Waiting to Exhale. Women also took five of the six top spots the following year. 
n
ewcomers included the Spice Girls (Spice), 
n
o Doubt (Tragic Kingdom), Jewel (Pieces of 
You), and LeAnn 
r
imes (Blue).
A number of things were striking about this trend. 
o
ne was the number of genres 
 
represented, including pop/dance (Mariah 
c
arey, Spice Girls), alternative/pop rock (Alanis 
 
Morissette), folk rock (Jewel), country (Shania Twain, LeAnn 
r
imes), and hip hop (Lauryn 
Hill). Equally interesting was that three of the 1996’s six biggest sellers hailed from 
c
anada—
Alanis Morissette, Shania Twain, and 
c
eline Dion.In strictly commercial terms, women 
artists dominated the 
b
illboard list of 
year-end, top-selling artists every year 
from 2009–2011. More than sales were 
at issue though, for female pop stars of the era were also expanding the range of acceptable representations attached 
to women artists.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 409The youngest of fourteen children, c eline Dion had been a veteran of the Francophone 
 
Quebec music scene since performing in her parents’ club at age five. She made her bid for inter-
national stardom on the strength of her first all-English album,Unison. When it crossed national 
and linguistic boundaries, she scrambled to appease her French-speaking base by very publicly 
refusing to accept the 
c
anadian Felix Award for Anglophone Artist of the Year. Still, her career 
choices bowed at least partially to the dictates of U.S. tastemakers. She was confirmed as an inter-
national superstar with Falling into You  (1996), the best-selling album in 1997 and winner of both 
the Album of the Year and Best Pop Album Grammys. Let’s Talk About Love (1999) was released on the same day as the soundtrack of the film Titanic. Dion’s “My Heart Will Go 
o
n” from that 
soundtrack was featured on both albums and pushed both to international sales of 27 million units.
Joining the ranks of top-selling 
c
anadian artists in 1997 was singer-songwriter Sarah 
McLachlan, whose Surfacing announced her entrance into the elite of pop superstars. McLach-
lan had developed a solid career as a singer-songwriter beginning with her debut album, Touch, 
in 1989. After working on a documentary in Southeast Asia about poverty and child sexual abuse, she returned to the studio, hitting her stride on Fumbling Towards Ecstasy (1994). In 1996, she founded Lilith Fair, a self-described “celebration of women in music,” which featured only female-led acts (although at times male backup musicians outnumbered the women on stage). Lilith Fair was the most successful concert tour of 1997. Between 1997 and 1999, its fi-nal year, it grew into a multicity, multidate event featuring dozens of artists on multiple stages.
Lilith Fair was for women what Lollapalooza was for alternative: a spectacular showcase that 
demonstrated it could succeed against all odds. And as with Lollapalooza, the organizers injected social consciousness into the event. With one dollar from every ticket sold being donated to a chari-table organization, Lilith Fair was able to distribute some $700,000 in 1997 alone to a variety of 
progressive women’s organizations. Throughout its run, McLachlan 
maintained a hands-on relationship with the festival and was the only headliner to perform every date. She was selflessly devoted to the festi-val’s goals and causes; at the same time, her strong presence at the 1997 festival helped propel Surfacing, just released, to four times platinum sales, generating three hit singles in the process. By the time she called it quits in 1999, her Mirrorball album was in the Top Ten.
c
ritics accused Lilith Fair of gravitating toward the softer end of the female performance 
spectrum, focusing primarily on singer-songwriters like Fiona Apple, Paula 
c
ole, Shawn 
 c
olvin, Joan 
o
sborne, and Suzanne Vega. “The cartoon image of Lilith,” wrote James Sullivan 
retrospectively in the San Francisco Chronicle, “has been one of anguished young maidens with 
wispy songs to sing.”83 As the festival grew in popularity, however, it also grew in diversity. 
In 1998 and 1999, artists included Erykah Badu, Missy “Misdemeanor” Elliott, Lauryn Hill, 
Queen Latifah, Me’Shell 
n
degéocello, and the Dixie 
c
hicks, as well as Bonnie 
r
aitt, Sinéad 
o
’
c
onnor, and the Pretenders. Even teen sensation 
c
hristina Aguilera came on board briefly 
in 1999. Asked where all this variety was in 1997, McLachlan responded: “We asked them all 
last year and they said no.”84 By 1999, Lilith Fair had concluded with a powerful female sound.
Women also dominated the 1999 Grammy Awards in a sweep that the Boston Globe’s 
Morse dubbed, once again, the Year of the Woman. Top honors went to Sheryl 
c
row, Alanis 
Morissette, Shania Twain, the Dixie 
c
hicks, Madonna, 
c
eline Dion, and Lauryn Hill (who took HEAR MORE
Sarah McLachlan on 
MySearchLab
Lilith Fair was for women what Lolla-
palooza was for alternative: a spectacu-
lar showcase that demonstrated it could 
succeed against all odds. And as with 
Lollapalooza, the organizers injected so-cial consciousness into the event.
410  rock I n’ o UTfive trophies, a record for a female artist). c row 
took Best 
r
ock Album for The Globe Sessions  
and Morissette walked away with Best 
r
ock 
Song and Best Female 
r
ock Vocal Performance 
for “Uninvited.” The Dixie 
c
hicks upset Sha-
nia Twain for Best 
c
ountry Album, but Shania 
shared the writing credits for Best 
c
ountry Song 
and walked off with Best Female 
c
ountry Vocal 
for “You’re Still the 
o
ne.” Madonna picked up 
Best Pop Album and Best Dance 
r
ecording for Ray of Light. Brandy and Monica (“The Boy Is 
Mine”) and Patti Labelle (“Live! 
o
ne 
n
ight 
o
nly”) won awards in the r&b category, Deniece Wil-
liams and 
c
issy Houston in gospel, and Patti Page in Best Traditional Pop Vocal Performance.
In years to follow, r&b would be a principal arena for female artists’ continued rise. The 
year 2003 was something of a breakout year for Beyoncé, who left Destiny’s 
c
hild to become a 
solo artist, releasing Dangerously in Love in June. By year’s end, it had sold 2 million copies and 
eventually generated five Top Ten pop singles, including two at number one—“
c
razy in Love” 
with Jay-Z and “Baby Boy,” enhanced by the staccato dancehall verse of Sean Paul. Beyoncé re-united with Destiny’s 
c
hild the following year to record their farewell album, Destiny Fulfilled, 
and then committed herself full-time to her solo career.
As a pop star, Beyoncé presented a compelling package: powerful vocals that could range 
easily from balladry to tough r&b; the glamorous good looks of a top-tier model; and acting talent, evident in a film career that saw her take starring roles in Dreamgirls (2006) and 
 
Cadillac 
Records (2008), in which she played a fictionalized version of classic soul singer Etta James. 
Some would question whether songs such as “
r
un the World (Girls)” from her 2011 chart-top-
ping album 4 were in fact as empowering as they were intended to be. 
n
oreen Malone observed 
on Slate.com  that “Beyoncé’s most ubiquitous female empowerment anthems (stretching back 
to her Destiny’s 
c
hild days) have gone from featuring independent women to single ladies to 
the current girls running the world,” not necessarily a liberating trajectory.85 However, her 
most significant gesture in the direction of empowerment may well have been her decision to 
assemble a tight, all-female band that she named Suga Mama, which accompanied her on her 
tour to support her album, B’day (2006), and remained her touring band through 2012.
Alicia 
k
eys took her place among other soul divas like Jill Scott and India.Arie, but she 
also helped carve out the cultural space occupied by singer/songwriters like 
n
orah Jones and 
Vanessa 
c
arlton. Her tastefully stunning debut album, Songs in A Minor, released in 2001, hit 
number one and sold four times platinum before the year was out, powered by the ubiqui-
tous, gospel-inflected hit single “Fallin’.” Born of an interracial couple and raised by her white mother, 
k
eys identified herself as black and displayed a maturity and self-confidence well be-
yond her years, claiming the influence of everyone from Marvin Gaye to Prince, Biggie Smalls, and 
c
hopin (“
c
hopin is my dawg”). At the 9/11 benefit America: A Tribute to Heroes, 
k
eys per-
formed a soulful version of Donny Hathaway’s classic “Someday We’ll All Be Free,” but hers 
was not a knee-jerk patriotism. Describing her ambivalence, she told one reporter: “ All day I been seein’ everyone rockin’ flags in they hats and on the street and I’m torn….I see lies in that flag. I can’t suddenly be all patriotic. But this is about human life beyond any country or flag.”
86Sarah McLachlan rose to prominence in the 
Year(s) of the Woman and founded Lilith Fair, the most important women’s tour of the 
1990s.
 rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 411Her long-awaited second album, The Diary of Alicia Keys, completed in 2003, didn’t so 
much break new ground as confirm the staying power of the youthful 
k
eys. With tracks rang-
ing from the waltz-time “If I Ain’t Got You” to the reggae-inflected “You Don’t 
k
now My 
n
ame,” 
k
eys demonstrated the same sophisticated musicality and soulful delivery that made 
her first album the defining moment of a new trend. Diary went to number one and multiplati-
num certification, and it finished 2004 as the year’s fourth most popular album. As I Am (2007) 
became her fourth straight number one album (after a 2005 Unplugged record also hit the top position); while her streak of chart-topping albums would end with The Element of Freedom  
(2009), which peaked at the number two position, she also provided the vocal hook for the mas-sive Jay-Z hit single “Empire State of Mind,” from his album The Blueprint 3. 
k
eys would end 
the decade ranked as Billboard ’s top hip hop/r&b artist for the years 2000–2009.
n
orah Jones—who, like 
k
eys, listed 
c
hopin as an influence—took the music forward into 
the terrain of pop jazz and what she described somewhat jokingly as “soft cock rock.” Jones never 
traded on the fact that her father is 
r
avi Shankar, the world-famous sitar master. After a period of 
waitressing and playing low-paying club dates, she scored a contract with Blue 
n
ote. Her mellow, 
sultry delivery on Come Away with Me propelled her debut album to eight times platinum certifi-cation and netted her an impressive five Grammy Awards, including Album of the Year, 
 r
ecord 
of the Year (“Don’t 
k
now Why”), and Best 
n
ew Artist, and stayed on the 
 
album charts for three 
years. “Don’t 
k
now Why,” never a blockbuster hit single, nevertheless became an instant 
 
classic. 
Jones’s sophomore album, Feels Like Home (2004), was not a major departure from her signature sound, described by her guitarist Adam Levy as “this cocktail of 
r
ay 
c
harles and Etta James, 
and Bill Evans on piano, and these simple country vocals, the way Loretta Lynn sings, so direct you can’t ignore it.”
87 The al-
bum sold 1 million copies in its first week and finished 2004 as 
the fifth most popular album of the year, one notch down from 
k
eys’s Diary.
o
ther popular female artists who came to prominence in 
the first decade of the 2000s also seemed to defy ready classi-
fication. Avril Lavigne presented a punk-inflected alternative to turn-of-the-century teen pop from her multiplatinum de-but Let’s Go (2002) to The Best Damn Thing (2007), which con-
tained her best-selling single “Girlfriend.” Label mate Pink offered everything from dance/pop (“Get the Party Started”) and mainstream rock (“18 Wheeler”) to deeply personal con-
fessionals (“Family Portrait,” “Dear Diary,” “My Vietnam”) on her own debut, M!ssundaztood (2001), and her subsequent output confirmed her status as a talented risk-taker. 
n
elly 
Furtado’s career has run the gamut of popular music styles HEAR MORE
Norah Jones on 
MySearchLab
Norah Jones’s smart pop jazz and sultry delivery produced 
incredible sales for someone signed to a jazz label.412  rock I n’ o UTfrom the eclectic Whoa, Nelly! (2000) to the all-Spanish Mi Plan (2009), encompassing r&b/
hip hop, alternative, Portuguese fado, Brazilian bossa nova, and Indian raga . Making perhaps 
the most dramatic impact was British singer Amy Winehouse, whose 2006 album Back to 
Black reinvented the sound and style of girl-group era 1960s pop and soul to stirring effect, 
reaching number two on the Billboard charts. Prevented from recording a follow-up by her crippling struggles with addiction, Winehouse was found dead in her London apartment in July 2011.
The successes of so many young female artists in the 2000s paved the way for the chart 
dominance that women achieved during the years 2009–2011. Winning Billboard ’s top art-
ist honors for 2009, Taylor Swift marked the biggest pop success for a country music artist since Shania Twain. Still in her teens, Swift described her first album as “my diary from my early teens,” and her second as “my diary from 16 to 18.”
88 That second album, Fear -
less, debuted at number one, remained on the charts for more than a year, and finished 2009 
as the top-selling album of the year. She also charted seventeen hit singles that year, with 
“Love Story” at number five for the year. In 2011, Billboard named Swift its “Woman of the 
Year”—at twenty-one, she was the youngest person ever to receive the honor. As a measure of her star power, it is interesting to note that artists as diverse as Justin Bieber, 
n
icki Minaj, 
k
enny 
c
hesney, Jason Mraz, Selena Gomez, and James Taylor have all appeared as guest 
artists at her concerts for free. They know how big her audience is. Asked about barriers fac-ing women in the music business, she replied: “For me, I’ve never really thought about boys versus girls, I’ve never thought about any kind of prejudice about women in country music because I never felt like it affected me.”
89
In 2010, Swift finished at number two, edged out of the top slot by Lady Gaga, on the 
strength of Gaga’s two best-selling albums The Fame and The Fame Monster, and her monster 
hit single, “Bad 
r
omance.” The year before, Gaga had earned the Best 
n
ew Artist designation, 
largely because of the runaway success of her ubiquitous hit single, “Poker Face.” By 2010, 
she had parlayed her fame into considerable fortune and a virtual Lady Gaga empire. As a 
n
ew York girl, Gaga is perhaps a bit more jaded and worldly than the perpetually upbeat and 
perky Taylor Swift. She also projected a more pronounced sense of mission in her ascent to 
pop stardom. Her ambition at first seemed largely self-aggrandizing—she continually asserted her originality in interviews, despite her clear indebtedness to a wide array of past influences from Madonna to David Bowie to Queen, whose song “
r
adio Gaga” was partly responsible 
for her choice of name. Like Madonna, she showed a potent talent for generating scandal by playing upon the constraints of gender and a joy in violating taboos that seemed to arise from 
her 
c
atholic background. Feminist pop critic Ann Powers summed up her importance on the 
release of The Fame Monster:
Her new songs address serious themes like women’s shame about their bodies and the need for open 
communication in relationships; her often physically distorting costumes show that the pursuit of the feminine ideal is far from natural. Her commitment to confront the changing notion of what’s “natural” puts Gaga on the same road traveled by artists she admires, such as the photographer Cindy Sherman. Her frank talk about how female artists aren’t expected to write their own songs or about how young women are afraid to ask for what they need from their sexual partners inches 
her toward a new articulation of feminism.
90HEAR MORE
Taylor Swift, Lady 
Gaga, and Adele on MySearchLab rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 413Lady Gaga’s “Bad Romance” is from an extended play recording called 
The Fame Monster, a follow-up to her CD Fame. The “monster” in Fame 
Monster refers to the dark side of fame, and the EP was conceived as an 
extreme contrast in mood and message to the former CD. “Bad Romance” 
in particular conveys the message that love also includes accepting a lover’s dark side that comes with being human. Taking the dark side one step farther, the disturbing and provocative video for “Bad Romance” is a 
surreal techno-nightmare involving betrayal and sex slavery, and ends with 
the incineration of the victim’s captor; hence the explosive sound effects 
at the end of the track. The lyrics contain interesting references, not only to “Gaga” herself, but also to three thrillers by filmmaker Alfred Hitchcock—Psycho, Vertigo, and Rear Window.
Musical Style Notes
In terms of its beat and synthesizer-rich texture, “Bad Romance” has characteristics of electronic dance music, 
particularly German house music. However, it is compositionally more complex, and its different sections display a lot of sonic variation, particularly in the interweaving of vocal tracks and the alternation of spoken, intoned, and 
sung sections. The song has a detectable ’80s influence, and yet both the chord progression (VI-VII-i in A minor) and 
the melody of the chorus is strongly reminiscent of the best of the 1960s “girl groups,” with a melodic “hook” that stays in the listener’s memory as tenaciously as its Brill Building predecessors. The hook, sung on a simple “Ooh” syllable, is used throughout the song with incredible skill, both as the chorus-opener and as a melody woven into the 
background of other parts of the chorus. This layering happens at various points throughout the song (see Musical 
“Road Map”).“Bad Romance”
Artist:
 
Lady Gaga
Music/Lyrics: Stefani Germanotta, 
Nadir Khayat
Label:
 
Interscope (2009), from 
the CD (EP) The Fame Monster
Listening Guide 36
By 2010, the outrageous Lady Gaga found herself at the 
head of a pack of unorthodox women who were dominating the pop charts at the time.414  rock I n’ o UTListening Guide 36Musical “Road Map”
Timings C ommen T s 
0:00–0:12 Harpsichord-like synthesizer passage, heard alone, almost as if in the background.
0:12–0:30
0:30–0:38
0:38–0:46The song begins with the “hook” that appears subsequently as the second half of the chorus.
Synthesizers begin at same time as vocals; rhythm tracks layer in gradually.
First line of “Ra-ra” lyric appears with only minimal rhythm track—additional rhythms added in 
layers.
Repeat of “Ra-ra” lyric introduces the 4/4 kick-drum house music rhythm.
0:46–1:18 Verse 1, percussive kick-drum house-music beat; rhythmic synthesizer grooves; additional vocal 
exclamations (“Hey,” etc.).
1:18–1:26 Transitional section with spoken words; gradual crescendo in synthesized track
1:26–2:07 Chorus
At 1:33, note the layering of the musical “hook,” woven into the background; it is then fore-
grounded at 1:42.
2:07–2:39 Verse 2
2:39–2:48 Transitional section with spoken words
Note the foregrounding and backgrounding of different spoken lines.
2:48–3:27 Chorus
3:27–3:44 Transitional section spoken (intoned)
3:443:59New section—repetitive melodyBackground instrumental track continues as above, but missing the 4/4 house music kick-drum 
rhythm
Note how the vocal of this new section is layered with the hook from the chorus, beginning with 
the “I don’t wanna be friends” line.
4:14–4:16 Vocal a cappella
4:16
4:354:48–4:56Chorus4/4 house music kick-drum rhythm returns.The layering of the musical “hook” is supplemented by the additional layering of the “want your 
bad romance!” line.
All instrumental and rhythm tracks drop out except for handclaps on beats 2 and 4.
4:56–5:08 Sound of explosion, layered with the synthesized harpsichord-like music that was heard at the 
beginning. rEPA ck AGI n G  Po P 415Her success continued with the 2011 album Born This Way , whose title track became a veri-
table anthem for her audience of self-proclaimed misfits that she affectionately termed her 
“little monsters”—including a sizable gay audience for whom she emerged as an outspoken 
advocate.
Succeeding Lady Gaga as 2011 Top Artist of the Year was Adele, someone Billboard  
described as “a real girl, down to her vintage dresses and average body size.”91 Adele’s second 
album, 21—her albums are named after her age—entered the Billboard charts at number one 
and remained in the top five for thirty-nine consecutive weeks, the longest top five chart run in the fifty-five year history of the album charts. It also generated two number one hit singles, 
“
r
olling in the Deep” and “Someone Like You,” that showcased her emotion-laden, soul-meets-
torch-ballad vocals. All told, Adele won Billboard ’s triple crown for 2011—Top Artist, Top 
 
Album, and Top Single of the Year—the first woman ever to do so. Despite the accolades, Adele appeared uncomfortable in the spotlight compared to peers like Lady Gaga, and shunned the overarching concern with image that female pop artists were typically unable to avoid. 
c
ommenting on her lack of conformity to the prevailing body type for women in the media 
spotlight, she asserted, “Even if I had a really good figure, I don’t think I’d get my tits and ass out for no one. I love seeing Lady Gaga’s boobs and bum….But that’s not what my music is 
about. I don’t make music for eyes. I make music for ears.”
92
During this three-year period, in addition to Swift, Gaga, and 
Adele, the pop charts were home to an incredible diversity of women 
that included chart veterans Beyoncé, Shakira, Britney Spears, Pink, 
and Jennifer Lopez, and newcomers 
k
aty Perry, 
n
icki Minaj, Lady 
Antebellum, 
k
e$ha, Miley 
c
yrus, and Susan Boyle. It was as if we 
had, all of a sudden, entered a world where women of all genres, styles, sizes, shapes, colors, 
and fashion statements could equal or even surpass the success of men.
The major record corporations that ruled the music industry grew by leaps and bounds during 
the 1990s as they were subject to a series of mergers prompted by the expanding global reach of music and media production. Although financially the industry experienced some decline mid-
decade, overall the 1990s was a time of massive earnings by these companies as sales of compact discs soared to new heights. The industry sought to maintain its profits by promoting high-powered superstars whose contracts at times proved unsustainable and whose careers were often unpredictable. Growth came instead from a range of trends that collectively suggested the contours of the popular music mainstream were being reconfigured, beginning with the pleasant surprise that a local music scene from Seattle could spread to a national market and define a genera-tion. Country and rap, already staples of the industry, became more firmly positioned within the mainstream, and rap’s commercial and cultural dominance remained a defining feature through the first decade of the twenty-first century even though some in the industry sought to keep it at arm’s length. Music by Latino artists also moved further into the mainstream than at any previ-
ous moment in U.S. history, a change that reflected the growth of Latin American immigration It was as if we had, all of a sudden, 
entered a world where women of all 
genres, styles, sizes, shapes, colors, and 
fashion statements could equal or even 
surpass the success of men.
416  rock I n’ o UTto the U.S. and the rise of music artists who were able and willing to move between English and 
Spanish, carving out a new path for crossover success. Female artists rose first as part of an un-derground movement, then a marketing trend, but eventually reached a level of popular appeal 
that cut across genres and suggested that a longer-term plateau had been reached. The failure of 
the music industry to completely pigeonhole consumers spoke to a truth that the major labels had never fully grasped: that most consumers’ tastes are far more diverse than music industry market-ing strategies permit. The question was whether this fact would prove to be the industry’s undo-ing as it confronted the devastating effects of 9/11 and the challenge of digital downloading in 
the new millennium.
LEARN MORE
Chapter Questions on 
MySearchLab  417
12
In September 2001, the radical left hip hop group the 
Coup was  preparing the release of its fourth album, Party Music. The 
planned cover of the album contained an image that was designed as a 
political provocation, but would soon appear eerily and controversially 
prophetic: MC Boots Riley and DJ Pam the Funkstress stood in front of 
New York’s World Trade Center towers, which were shown to be blow-
ing up. Riley held what appeared to be a detonating device in his hand, suggesting that he and his DJ were responsible for the act. When the Twin Towers did in fact crumble to the ground on the morning of September 11, 2001, the Coup’s record company—the independent 75 Ark, distributed by Warner Music—immediately required that the group change the cover image for the forthcoming album. They complied, but Riley remained unapologetic of the intended message even in the face of accusations that he supported terrorism: “When we originally made that picture it was in May and June. It was supposed to be a metaphor to symbolize us destroy-
ing ‘capitalism.’”
1
The Coup’s experience was emblematic of a shift in the national mood. After the terror-
ist attacks of September 11, patriotism became de rigueur, and protest and dissent were muffled 
in the name of individual sensitivity and/or national security. Voices like the Coup, critical of 
U.S. government response to the tragedy and the ensuing, questionable wars in Afghanistan 
and Iraq, did not fade away entirely, but much effort was made to drown them out or even ex-clude them from the most widely broadcast channels of national communication. In the wake of 9/11, a new role was given to popular music: to support what U.S. leaders sought to promote as a new national mission.
What happened on that day also led to a substantial downturn in the national and world 
economies. However, where the music industry was concerned, the economic effects of 9/11 only compounded a shift that had already begun to take hold. By the early 2000s, the music business had experienced a profound reversal of fortunes. Following the rising returns of the LEARN MORE
Learning objectives 
on MySearchLabChanging Channels: 
Music and Media  in the New Millennium418  R o C k IN ’ o UTteen pop phenomenon, the industry posted a 25 percent decline from 2000–2003; this led to 
yet another round of mergers and cutbacks. Sony Music merged with BMG in 2004. That same year, Edgar Bronfman, Jr., having sold his Universal Music Group to Vivendi in France, 
bought the Warner Music Group for $2.6 billion after Time Warner cut its music division 
loose from the disastrous A
o
L-Time Warner merger. The Sony-BMG merger resulted in the 
loss of 2,000 staff positions, and the restructuring plan for the new Warner Music Group called for the elimination of another 1,000 jobs.
2 As profits continued to shrink in the ensuing years, 
further industry contraction came with the purchase of EMI by the Universal Music Group—a 
transaction that was initiated in 2011 and completed in 2012, and which would leave only three 
major record corporations still standing, half of what had existed in 1998.3
While the effects of 9/11 may have stifled consumer spending, the root cause of the in-
dustry’s travails lay elsewhere. Technological developments suggested a reevaluation of the 
industry’s core business model, but the major labels did not heed the call. By the early 2000s, it 
was clear that the future of music would be tied to free-floating digital sound files traveling 
across the Internet. The music industry had always treated the Internet with caution and sus-picion, and had remained largely unaware of the research on file compression that had been 
going on for years at Germany’s Fraunhofer Institute. The insti-tute’s audio compression standard MP3, which shrinks an audio CD file to one-tenth its original size without appreciable loss of quality, had been approved in 1992. But it wasn’t until computer clock speeds and network capacity increased enough to permit effi-cient transfers of MP3 files at the turn of the new millennium that 
MP3 threatened to become the Trojan horse that could topple the 
music business. Industry responses ranged from adaptation—exemplified by the effort to carve out “legitimate” vehicles for online music consumption—to more reactionary maneuvers that involved policing the activities of ordinary music listeners and placing more stringent restric-tions on copyright. Despite vigorous effort, the industry found itself unable to seize control of the changes taking shape and struggled to take advantage of the multiplying possibilities pre-sented by new media.
They Want Their MP3
The MP3 is a technology that reduces the size of an existing audio file by eliminating frequen-
cies that are deemed unnecessary to the enjoyment of the listener. As media historian Jonathan Sterne points out, it is designed to take advantage of the limitations of human hearing, and its 
success has demonstrated that the average music listener is willing to trade quality of sound 
for ease of use:
MP3s are designed to be heard via headphones while outdoors, in a noisy dorm room, in an office 
with a loud computer fan … . They are meant for casual listening, moments when listeners may or may not attend directly to the music … . In other words, the MP3 is a medium which, in most practi-cal contexts, gives the full experience of listening to a recording while only offering a fraction of the information and allowing listeners’ bodies to do the rest of the work. The MP3 plays its listener.
4But it wasn’t until computer clock 
speeds and network capacity increased 
enough to permit efficient transfers 
of MP3 files at the turn of the new 
 
millennium that MP3 threatened to 
 
become the Trojan horse that could 
topple the music business.
 C HANGING  C HANNELS 419MP3 grew as a preferred medium for obtaining and listening to music in conjunction 
with a number of interrelated trends. The increasingly widespread use of personal computers 
throughout the 1980s and 1990s was a necessary precondition, as was the quickening speed of 
broadband Internet connections. Just as important was a growing tendency toward mobility 
and portability in listening practices, alluded to by Sterne, that had evolved from the intro-duction of the Sony Walkman in 1979—at a time when audio cassettes were the most readily portable medium—to the advent in 2001 of Apple’s iPod, which was built for the age of MP3 listening and marked a milestone in the miniaturization of audio hardware.
Personal computers were the first device through which MP3 files became widely acces-
sible. Before online e-tailer MP3.com was forced into bankruptcy by the major record labels, it had posted thousands of MP3 files on its website for easy download. But it was peer-to-peer (P2P) technologies like Napster, Gnutella, and Freenet that realized MP3’s full potential. 
Developed by Shawn Fanning, a Northeastern University student at the time, Napster was a combination search engine, communication portal, and file-sharing software that facilitated sharing MP3 files; to logged-in users, it granted access to all other Napster users and the MP3 files they chose to share. As early as 2000, the worldwide Napster community was estimated to be as large as 40 million users. Newer technologies took the process one step further. Gnutella and Freenet allowed direct user-to-user contact, making it much more difficult to track users or files. Freenet enabled such direct transactions with any file type—audio, video, text, data-bases, etc.—and added file encryption and user anonymity.
These developments were of great concern to the music industry, which had become 
significantly more concentrated at a time when technological advances demanded a model of decentralization. The Internet and MP3 linked consumers directly with the artists and music 
of their choice, thus bypassing the record companies completely. As an unprotected format, 
MP3 left the industry with no way to regulate its use. MP3 usage quickly gained momentum. According to a 1999 article, “ About 846 million new CDs were sold last year. But at least 17 million MP3 files are downloaded from the Net each day. That adds up to almost 3 billion in  
the first six months of 1999.”
5 And that was  before 
Napster was fully unleashed. A later study esti -
mated that Napster users downloaded 1.3 billion 
songs in September 2000 alone, and that at any 
given moment, 640,000 Napster users were online together.
6
Rather than embracing the Internet’s poten-
tial and taking the lead in developing affordable, 
user-friendly methods of downloading music, the 
Shawn Fanning developed the software that could have 
 revolutionized the music industry. Apparently he didn’t hold a grudge against the band that sued him for his trouble.
420  R o C k IN ’ o UTmusic industry retreated into a protectionist mode, seeking to prop up its dated business model 
of manufacturing and selling CDs. Fearful of a decline in sales, the industry adopted a two-pronged strategy of legislation and litigation: advocating for expanded copyright laws and su -
ing alleged infringers. New, restrictive legislation strengthened corporate copyright protection 
and narrowed the terrain of fair use. A flurry of legal actions ensued, primarily targeting MP3.com and Napster and demonizing their users as pirates and thieves.
Legislation and Litigation
To grasp the severity of these actions, it is important to understand that copyright law has 
never simply mandated an exclusive contract to exploit the fruits of one’s creativity. Rather, it has been a balancing act, weighing the legal protection of intellectual property and providing 
an incentive for creative work against the public rights of access to information and freedom of 
expression. The U.S. Constitution states: “The Congress shall have 
power … to promote the progress of science and useful arts, by 
 
securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries.”
7 Harvard’s 
 
William Fisher has asserted that most legal scholars have inter-
preted the founding fathers’ primary concern as the promotion of 
learning; protecting authors was a means to that end.8 This 
 
perspective was reaffirmed in the late 1980s House Report on the 
Berne Convention Implementation Act of 1988: “‘The constitu-
tional purpose of copyright is to facilitate the flow of ideas in the interest of learning.’ …  
[T]he primary objective of our copyright laws is not to reward the author, but rather to secure 
for the public the benefits from the creations of authors.”9
The legislation of the late 1990s inverted these priorities by serving the interests of cor-
porate capital over those of the general public. The No Electronic Theft Act of 1997 prose-
cuted people who accessed copyrighted materials electronically without authorization, whether 
or not they realized any “commercial advantage or private financial gain,”10 and thus criminal-
ized a range of practices once considered fair use. The Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 
1998 made it illegal to circumvent any technological measures protecting sound recordings 
and other copyrighted material. The Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act (1998) ex-
tends U.S. copyrights owned by corporations to ninety-five years and individually held copy-rights to the life of the author plus seventy years, effectively eliminating the public domain for anything written during the lifetime of any current listener.
The music industry launched its first legal salvo against online music in 
o
ctober 1998, 
targeting Diamond Multimedia’s Rio, a portable MP3 player. Fearing piracy on a grand scale, the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) sought to enjoin Diamond under the Digital Audio Home Recording Act of 1992, which levied a tax on digital audio recorders and blank media. The courts ruled in favor of Diamond for the very narrow reason that the legisla-
tion targeted only recording devices and the Rio was considered a storage device.
Undaunted, the RIAA sued MP3.com, then the best-known source of online MP3 files. 
In late 1999, MP3.com constructed an online database of some 60,000 commercially available copyright law has never simply 
 
mandated an exclusive contract to  
exploit the fruits of one’s creativity.  
Rather, it has been a balancing act, 
weighing the legal protection of 
 
intellectual property and providing an incentive for creative work against the 
public rights of access to information 
and freedom of expression.
 C HANGING  C HANNELS 421CDs and gave free access to users who inserted a matching CD into a computer and “beamed” 
its contents to My.MP3.com. The RIAA alleged infringement of the copyrights of all the major label recordings in the database. Because MP3.com had not negotiated licensing arrangements, 
it had little chance to win the suit. Still, its argument—that once someone buys a recording, 
the music industry should no longer have control over its use—remains a point of debate.
Artists themselves were divided on the question. Paul McCartney sued MP3.com, and  
P . Diddy and others spoke out against file sharing, while Prince praised Napster as “an exciting new development in the history of music.”
11 Unsigned artists turned overwhelmingly to the 
Internet for self-promotion. Roger McGuinn, founder of the Byrds and veteran of twenty-five 
albums on four different labels, testified at the 2000 U.S. Senate hearings on digital music: “In 
most cases a modest advance against royalties was all the money I received for my participation 
in these recording projects.”12 In contrast, he stated that MP3.com
offered an unheard of, non-exclusive recording contract with a royalty rate of 50% of the gross 
sales....MP3.com not only allowed me to place these songs on their server, but also offered to make 
CDs of these songs for sale. They absorbed all the packaging and distribution costs. So far I have made thousands of dollars from the sale of these folk recordings on MP3.com … . MP3.com has offered me more artistic freedom than any of my previous relationships with mainstream recording companies … .  
When young bands ask me how to get their music heard, I always recommend MP3.com.
13
By the end of 2000, MP3.com had settled with all the major labels for an estimated $170 
million and had revived My.MP3.com as a subscription service. Competing e-tailers such as 
myplay and Musicbank were negotiating similar licensing arrangements. But these services 
failed because they could not compete with the power and potential of peer-to-peer file-sharing 
networks like Napster. It was Napster that crystallized all the music industry’s fears about piracy and theft.
The RIAA filed suit against Napster on behalf of eighteen powerful record companies in 
December 1999, alleging “contributory and vicarious” copyright infringement. Another suit, brought by the heavy metal group Metallica (joined by Dr. Dre), further polarized the music world. Their monitoring showed that 330,000-plus Napster users had downloaded 1.4 
 
million 
Metallica songs during a three-day period.14 Metallica demanded that Napster remove the 
violators from their service in a lawsuit that also named three universities. Napster, accord-
ing to its own antipiracy policy, complied and removed all the named users. As required by 
law, however, Napster also issued a statement that anyone who felt that they had been falsely 
identified could petition the company for reinstatement. After the first 17,000 users had peti-tioned Napster, Metallica’s lawyer decried: “What Napster has done is create 17,000 liars.”
15 
Such statements alienated the most dedicated segment of the record-buying public. Wrote 
P . J. 
 
Huffstutter in the LA Times: “The industry’s crusade to block technological innovation 
has been taken as a declaration of war against young music fans, traditionally its most fervent 
customers. Fighting back, computer-savvy kids have united and are turning a business dispute into a holy war.”
16
While the RIAA’s case against Napster ran its course, the upstart company tried to make 
a deal with the major record labels that would give the labels a significant financial stake in its 
future, and so provide them with a foothold in the digital distribution of music that they thus HEAR MORE
Napster on 
MySearchLab422  R o C k IN ’ o UTfar lacked. Negotiations, however, broke down. In March 2001, the court enjoined Napster to 
take all “reasonable” steps to block any copyrighted songs from its network upon receiving notice from the record companies. The RIAA gave Napster a list of some 675,000 protected 
works with 8 million file names that it wanted blocked; Napster was unable to comply with 
such demands. By summer 2001, the wildly popular file-sharing network had been effectively shut down. The record industry, meanwhile, had lost its first and best chance to get in on the electronic music trade before it lost further ground, a missed opportunity that would loom large in years to come.
17
Piracy and Theft
Using loaded terms like piracy and theft, the music industry argued that file swapping and digi-
tal downloading were tantamount to stealing. Doing so, it drew upon a long history of dis-criminating between legitimate and “disobedient” forms of reproducing music, from early 
twentieth century opposition to printed song sheets that circulated music lyrics in unlicensed 
fashion to the prevalent claim, during the 1980s heyday of the audio cassette, that “home tap -
ing is killing music.”
18 Had they been able to get past their fears of lost revenue and understand 
these practices in more value-neutral terms, the major labels might 
have been able to see Napster’s worth as a promotional vehicle. In a 
University of Southern California study conducted in 2000, 73 per-
cent of students who downloaded MP3s reported that they still bought the same number of, or more, CDs,
19 which was also re -
ported by 87 percent of downloaders in a different study.20 Indeed, 
according to the industry’s own mid-year 2000 figures—a period of 
heavy Napster activity—an RIAA press release stated: “The number of full-length CDs … is at 
an all-time high, growing 6.0% from this time last year, … which suggests once again, that 
consumer demand for music in the form of a CD remains the mainstay.”21 The importance of 
this pattern cannot be emphasized enough: During Napster’s heyday, CD album sales were still 
on the rise. Who, then, were the pirates and thieves?
The music industry’s projection of such terms onto consumers and MP3 services de-
flected attention from its own less-than-ethical practices. Though the industry has generally 
cast its policing actions as “protection for creative musicians,” the evidence suggests that its goal has always been to protect corporate profits. 
o
ne-sided contracts have always dominated 
the industry—with low royalty rates, unfair publishing arrangements, multiyear renewals that keep an artist tied to a particular label, and advances against royalties that keep artists per-petually in debt. In 1999, at the behest of the RIAA, Mitch Glazier, then majority counsel to the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Intellectual Property—and later the RIAA’s chief lobbyist—slipped a three-line amendment into an omnibus appropriations bill that made all 
recordings “works for hire”—in effect, reducing artists to hired hands of the record companies. Master recordings, which previously had reverted to artists after thirty-five years, became the property of the record companies forever. President Clinton signed the bill into law without debate. After intense pressure from artists like Don Henley and Sheryl Crow, who organized the Recording Artists Coalition, the law was reversed the following year.Using loaded terms like piracy and 
theft, the music industry argued that file 
swapping and digital downloading were 
tantamount to stealing. Doing so, it drew 
upon a long history of discriminating between legitimate and “disobedient” forms of reproducing music.
 C HANGING  C HANNELS 423In May 2000, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) settled a suit against all the  major 
labels involving a price-fixing scheme—minimum advertising price programs (MAPS)—
whereby these companies paid stores to advertise particular CDs in return for specifying 
minimum retail prices in the ads. Calling them “coercive agreements,” FTC chairman 
 
Robert 
Pitofsky stated: “There was no plausible business justification for this other than to get prices 
up.”22 According to the suit, consumers were overcharged $500 million for CDs in a two-
year period. The settlement obligated the major labels to refrain from MAPS-like programs 
for seven years, resulting in potential savings for consumers of an estimated $17 million per 
month.
Such behavior makes it evident that terms like piracy and theft are relative. These terms 
also put a narrow, negative spin on considerably more complicated issues. If one replaces them 
with phrases such as file sharing and community building, for example, a far more positive picture of the Napster community emerges.
Regardless of lawsuits and verbal attacks, it was clear from the beginning that the 
 
industry had to incorporate certain Napster features if it were to survive. Napster set the stan-dard for user friendliness, and offered a music library that cut across artists, songs, and labels, enabling users to compile CDs of exactly the music they wanted. Individual labels—divided 
by imprint, genre, race, language, and so on—couldn’t duplicate this kind of resource. Finally, Napster users did not simply trade music files. They shared ideas and feelings, argued pas-sionately about music, and turned each other on to new sounds. In short, they self-selected into communities of taste that constituted a better promotional vehicle than anything the music industry had at its disposal.
Throughout the Napster controversy, many observers felt that the major labels were 
using the courts to buy time until they could figure out how to enter the online record business on their own terms. 
k
ey to this prospect was the industry’s search for a secure 
digital format to use for commercial music downloading. The Secure Digital Music Initia-tive (SDMI) was envisioned as a standard that would encode a sound file with a digital watermark identifying its owner and origin, thus discouraging piracy on the Internet. After 
nearly two years of experimentation with four types of watermarks, Princeton computer 
scientist Edward Felten and a team of students defeated all four.
23 The initiative never came 
to fruition.
The Music Industry in a Post-Napster World
After rejecting a potential partnership with Napster, the major labels inaugurated two online 
music services: Pressplay, a joint venture of Sony and Vivendi Universal, and MusicNet, a com-peting project of A
o
L Time-Warner, BMG, and EMI. At launch, both services were restricted 
to the catalogues of the participating labels and offered only limited access to digital music, for 
a monthly fee. Pressplay aligned itself with Microsoft’s Windows Media Player, and MusicNet used RealNetworks’ Real
o
ne Player—competing platforms that only hampered collaboration 
and cross-label licensing. Meanwhile, the U.S. Department of Justice launched an antitrust in-vestigation of MusicNet and Pressplay to determine if the major labels had colluded to set rates and terms.424  R o C k IN ’ o UTNot surprisingly, next-generation Napster clones such as Grokster, Morpheus, and 
 k
aZaA jumped in to fill the void left by the major labels. For the first week of 2002, for in-
stance, the Real
o
ne Player was downloaded 18,000 times, compared with 1.5 million down-
loads for Morpheus and 1 million for 
k
aZaA.24 As of the year ending September 2002, the 
free 
k
aZaA software had been downloaded 120 million times. The RIAA responded by join -
ing forces with the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), following essentially the 
same strategy used against Napster. But the RIAA received stun-
ning setbacks in its suits against Grokster, Morpheus, and 
k
aZaA. 
First, an appeals court in the Netherlands ruled that distributing the 
k
aZaA software there did not violate copyright law, stipulat-
ing: “Insofar as there are acts that are relevant to copyright, such acts are performed by those who use the computer program and 
not by 
k
aZaA.”25 Then, in April 2003, in what amounted to a complete reversal of the 
 
Napster decision, Los Angeles federal judge Stephen Wilson ruled that Grokster and 
 
Morpheus were not liable for the infringing practices of their users. Basing his decision on 
the famous 1984 Sony Betamax case, which recognized that these technologies are capable of 
“substantial non-infringing uses,” the judge noted that Napster opened itself to liability by playing an active role in connecting its users, whereas Grokster and Morpheus had no 
 
control over the actions of their users once they downloaded the software.26 Denied the legal 
basis for eliminating peer-to-peer services, the music business began suing thousands of 
 
individual consumers.
While the initial threat of prosecution precipitated a drop in music downloading over the 
summer of 2003, file sharing had already grown to proportions that even the Napster com-munity couldn’t have imagined. The RIAA estimated that 2.6 billion copyrighted song files were being traded over P2P networks every month; 
k
aZaA was leading the pack, with over 
230 million users, up from 100 million one year earlier.27 Market research data showed a steady 
increase in the number of P2P users online at any given time, from 3.8 million in August 2003 
to 6.7 million in 
o
ctober 2004.28
Industry figures on the decline in CD sales ranged from 26 percent to 31 percent be-
tween 2000 and 2003, and file sharing was always cited as a major source of the problem. Ac-cording to Forrester Research, however, the decline since 2000 had been 15 percent, with only 
35 percent of that due to unauthorized downloading.
29 A more definitive study by economists 
at the Harvard Business School and the University of North Carolina concluded: “Downloads 
have an effect on sales which is statistically indistinguishable from zero.”30 Indeed, for the most 
popular albums—“the top 25 percent that had more than 600,000 sales”—the study found a positive correlation between downloading and sales: “For every 150 songs downloaded … sales 
jumped by one CD.”
31 This study was compelling because it relied not on interviews, but on a 
comparison of data from 1.75 million downloads during a seventeen-week period with Nielsen 
SoundScan sales data during the same period. Whatever the actual figures, it had to be admit-
ted that punitive lawsuits certainly were not designed to stimulate CD sales. The San Jose 
Mercury News put it best when it editorialized, “Suing your customers, as a long-term strategy, is dumb.”
32 But sue they did.Napster opened itself to liability by 
playing an active role in connecting its 
users, whereas Grokster and Morpheus 
had no control over the actions of 
their users once they downloaded the software.
 C HANGING  C HANNELS 425Beginning in April 2003 the RIAA surprised hundreds of thousands of file swappers with 
an email message that read:
It appears that you are offering copyrighted music to others from your computer … . When you 
break the law, you risk legal penalties. There is a simple way to avoid that risk: DON’T STEAL MUSIC, either by offering it to others to copy or downloading it on a “file-sharing” system like this. When you offer music on these systems, you are not anonymous and you can easily be identified.
33
In fact, the RIAA had already sued four college students for allegedly uploading 27,000 
to 1 million songs each. The lawsuits asked for damages of $150,000 per song (the maximum 
under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act), effectively suing the students for billions of dol-
lars. The RIAA located the students by intercepting their Internet addresses on the P2P net-
works, then sending subpoenas to their Internet service providers (ISPs) for their real names and addresses.
Verizon—an ISP subpoenaed for subscribers’ information—fought the case vigorously 
because the controversial fast-track subpoena process in the Digital Millennium Copyright Act Second generation file-swapping services like KaZaA dwarfed even the 
 Napster community in numbers of users.
426  R o C k IN ’ o UTallowed copyright holders to obtain subpoenas from court clerks, without having to go before a 
judge or first file a lawsuit. Civil liberties groups joined the case, concerned about privacy and due process. Verizon and other commercial ISPs were also alarmed that the burden of copy-
right enforcement would fall on them. Eventually, over 100 commercial ISPs and universities 
were subpoenaed. Some universities readily turned over the contact information of the alleged student violators. 
o
thers, like the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and Boston 
College, opposed the subpoenas, arguing that they violated provisions of the Family Education Rights and Privacy Act.
In June 2003, Verizon lost on appeal, which opened the floodgates to over a thousand 
new subpoenas. These translated into 261 individual lawsuits. Preteen Brianna Lahara, whose mother settled out of court for $2,000, became the poster child for the heavy-handed tactics of the music industry. Grokster president Wayne Rosso offered to pay the bill, denouncing 
the RIAA as “the show-business version of the Taliban.”
34 By this time, the RIAA altered its 
demand letter to urge downloaders to settle out of court. It also promoted an amnesty pro-
gram called Clean Slate, which reportedly protected users against prosecution if they signed 
a statement saying they had illegally downloaded files and would refrain from doing so again. 
The Electronic Frontier Foundation correctly pointed out that the RIAA could not prohibit lawsuits by its member labels or other rights holders; thus, signing the affidavit would be tan-tamount to giving them a signed confession with no guarantees against prosecution.
Undeterred by the lack of access to mass subpoenas and a constant stream of bad press, 
the RIAA continued targeting individuals for the next few years. As of 
o
ctober 2005, most of 
the 3,300 alleged file traders who had settled out of court had forked over $3,000 to $11,000 apiece, creating a handsome new revenue stream for the music business.
35 By May 2006, more 
than 18,000 people had been sued in the United States alone, with another 5,500 in eighteen 
other countries.36 As of June 2006, none of these cases had been adjudicated in court—in other 
words, not a single person had been convicted of any wrongdoing. Indeed, the first case to go to trial targeted Patricia Santangelo, a single mother of five, whom the judge described as “an 
Internet-illiterate parent, who does not know 
k
azaa from kazoo, and who can barely retrieve 
her e-mail.”37 Santangelo surprised industry lawyers by insisting on going to trial rather than 
settling out of court, and fought the RIAA to a standstill, becoming a P2P folk hero in the pro-
cess. In April 2007, her case was dismissed with prejudice, which meant that the RIAA could 
not sue her again. But in 2009, after the RIAA went after two of her children, the family agreed 
to settle for $7,000.
Santangelo’s case emboldened others like Tanya Anderson, who not only beat the RIAA 
and recovered her legal fees, but also countersued and petitioned the court for class action status for her case. Still, of the 40,000 people the RIAA claims to have targeted, fewer than 100 have decided to go to court.
38 In December 2008, the RIAA announced that it was discontinuing its 
strategy of suing individuals, but decided not to drop cases already in progress, two of which 
turned out to be landmark victories for the music industry. Jammie Thomas-Rasset had been 
fined $222,000 by the courts for downloading 24 songs in 2007, but was granted a new trial in 
2009 because the judge found the penalty excessive. Incredibly, the verdict in the second trial raised the penalty to $80,000 per song, or $1.92 million. A further trial reset the amount at $1.5 million in 2010, which was then reduced to $54,000 by yet another judge who objected to the  C HANGING  C HANNELS 427inflated figure, a decision the RIAA appealed.39 Concurrently, the industry pursued graduate stu-
dent Joel Tenenbaum; he retained Harvard lawyer Charles Nessen, who petitioned the court to 
stream the trial on the Internet (but the RIAA balked) and built his case around a fair use defense 
(which Judge Nancy Gertner disallowed). In the end, Tenenbaum was fined $675,000, a decision 
the U.S. Supreme Court let stand in May 2012. Meanwhile, “The $675,000 Mixtape” of the 30 songs Tenenbaum was accused of sharing became available for free download on the Pirate Bay.
Throughout its campaign of suing individuals, the music industry never lost sight of the 
central role of the P2P networks. In 2004, the Australian music industry decided to go after 
k
aZaA. The first question, however, was where 
k
aZaA called home. 
While its domain name was registered to an Australian company called LEF Interactive—which took its name from the French slo-gan liberté, égalité, fraternité—its software was licensed to a company 
in Estonia, its servers were in Denmark, and its Web interface was 
owned by Sharman Networks, officially located on the island of Vanuatu. The major labels got court permission to raid the offices of Sharman Networks and the homes of its executives to search for evidence of copyright infringement. In September 2005, the court ruled that Sharman had encouraged copyright infringement on 
 k
aZaA and that it was liable for 90 percent of the industry’s legal 
fees (millions of dollars). The major labels were also expected to petition for several billion 
 
dollars in damages. Seeing the writing on the wall, 
k
aZaA prohibited Australians from down-
loading its software and agreed to settle with the music industry.
By this time, Grokster and its co-defendant, StreamCast Networks (owner of Morpheus), 
had met a similar defeat. In June 2005, the U.S. Supreme Court unanimously ruled that compa-nies that actively encourage or induce users to engage in illegal file trading are liable for their users’ actions. Wrote Justice David Souter, “We hold that one who distributes a device with the object of promoting its use to infringe copyright, as shown by clear expression or other af-firmative steps taken to foster infringement, is liable for the resulting acts of infringement by third parties.”
40 Though the Court did not rule that Grokster and Morpheus were liable, instead 
referring the case back to the lower court, Souter’s opinion stated clearly that both companies 
“took active steps to encourage infringement.”41 StreamCast pledged to continue fighting the 
case. Grokster settled for $50 million in damages and stopped distributing its software. The Grokster website (www.grokster.com) went dark, except for the following statement:
The United States Supreme Court unanimously confirmed that using this service to trade copy-
righted material is illegal. Copying copyrighted motion picture and music files using unauthor -
ized peer-to-peer services is illegal and is prosecuted by copyright owners. There are legal services for downloading music and movies. This service is not one of them.
Until Grokster, the primary limitation on suits against a service provider for “contrib -
utory and vicarious infringement” had been the 1984 Sony Betamax standard of “substan-
tial non-infringing uses.” Souter’s opinion, which “premises liability on purposeful, culpable 
 
expression and conduct,” clearly established a new standard, which narrowed the “substantial 
non-
 
infringing uses” standard applied by the appeals court in Grokster a year earlier.42The first question, however, was where 
KaZaA called home. While its domain 
name was registered to an Australian 
company called LEF Interactive—which 
took its name from the French slogan liberté, égalité, fraternité—its software was licensed to a company in Estonia, 
its servers were in Denmark, and its 
Web interface was owned by Sharman Networks, officially located on the 
 
island of Vanuatu.
428  R o C k IN ’ o UTIn the end, it was not clear what effect the Grokster decision would have on P2P and 
technological innovation generally. 
o
n the one hand it precipitated further legal victories such 
as the 2010 injunction issued by a U.S. federal court against the popular file sharing software 
LimeWire that prohibited its further distribution. 
o
n the other hand, by the time the decision 
was handed down, a third generation of more sophisticated and further decentralized P2P net-
works like BitTorrent and eDonkey had arisen, rendering such victories largely ineffective. A new chapter was added to this saga in 2009 when the four founders of the Pirate Bay—report-edly the biggest host of BitTorrent trackers in the world—were found guilty of assisting in copyright infringement in a Swedish court and sentenced to one year in prison and fined a total of $3.5 million. Again, the practical value of the decision was unclear because the company’s servers had long since been moved to Thailand.
Throughout this period, there was only one legal downloading service that showed any 
real promise—Apple’s iTunes (Music) Store. Launching its new venture in spring 2003 over 
the slogan “Downloads done right,” Apple began with a catalogue of some 200,000 songs from five major companies and offered users simplicity, affordability, convenience, and flexibility. The iTunes interface was as user-friendly as any file-sharing service: Songs sold for $.99 per single ($9.99 for most albums), and the user was permitted easy transferability to Apple’s iPod portable music player and unlimited CD burning. With that simple formula, the iTunes Store shocked and delighted record-company executives when it sold 1 million songs in each of its first two weeks of operation—at a time when iTunes was available to less than 1 percent of the record-buying public. Shortly afterward, Apple then introduced a Windows-compatible version of the iTunes software and invited 150 representatives from independent labels to participate in the venture on an equal footing with the majors.
Apple’s accomplishment also had some limitations. The sound files available for down-
load were copy-protected AAC files, a version of the newer MP4 format. 
o
n the upside, unlike 
MP3, MP4 is public domain software; it boasts better compression and better sound quality than MP3—but its files will not play on traditional MP3 players. AAC also includes the ca-pability of digital rights management (DRM), which allowed Apple to “authorize” loading the files onto a limited number of computers at a time. While such limitations were minimal and easily managed, it was easy to see how additional restrictions could propel users back toward unrestricted peer-to-peer networks.
Apple’s success with such a small market share encouraged other companies to try to 
compete with the company in the more lucrative PC market. The most interesting venture was proposed by Roxio, who acquired the rights to the Napster brand at fire sale prices. Then, in May 2003, Roxio bought pressplay and launched an online music store using the press-play technology and the Napster brand name.
43 In 2006, Microsoft went toe-to-toe with Apple 
with its own MP3 player—the Zune. Amazon entered the business in 2008, posting only unre-
stricted MP3 files with a variable pricing scheme.
Despite such efforts by other companies, Apple continually vanquished all competitors, 
maintaining a market share in the 70 percent range, with all other online services dividing the 
remains with single-digit market shares. Since its debut in 2001, Apple’s iPod had established itself as the icon of digital music (and then photo and video) players, its main competitors being other, subsequent Apple products such as the iPhone and iPad. 
o
ther services found it difficult  C HANGING  C HANNELS 429to beat Apple’s combination of style, ease of use, and seamless hardware/software integration. 
By 2005, the online store was outselling bricks-and-mortar outlets like Tower Records and Sam Goody. In February 2006, the iTunes Music Store sold its  
1 billionth song.
44 By 2009, that figure had mushroomed to 6 bil-
lion. Perhaps even more impressive, by September 2009, Apple had sold 220 million iPods. By allowing Apple to take the lead and 
 
essentially set the terms for the online sale of digital music, the 
 
record industry conceded any grasp it might have had over the 
 
digital realm. The industry’s recovery was not going to be founded 
on $.99 songs (or even $1.29, as prices rose), and as industry ana-lyst Steve 
k
nopper observed, “Labels made exactly zero dollars for every iPod sale”—and made 
even less when those iPods were mainly filled with music downloaded for free.45
Popular Music, Power, and Protest after 9/11
The growth of the Internet as a tool for distributing music shook the music industry. A differ-
ent kind of turning point came with the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States, which shook the country out of its complacency regarding national security, prompted 
an outpouring of sympathy from around the world, and sent the economy into a serious de-
cline. These events also ushered in something of a new role for contemporary popular music. Historically, the rock and rap axis of U.S. popular music had most often been associated with rebellion, defiance, resistance, and opposition. After 9/11, this same music was also conscripted into the service of mourning, healing, nation-building, and patriotism.
Music outlets monitored listener call-ins closely as indicators of their audience’s frame 
of mind after the attacks. While classic rock stations fielded requests for old chestnuts like John Lennon’s “Imagine” and Simon and Garfunkel’s “Bridge over Troubled Water,” heavy metal outlets pushed the sonic envelope with Jimi Hendrix’s “Star Spangled Banner” and 
 
Metallica’s “Don’t Tread on Me.” Songs in demand at country stations leaned toward 
 
patriotic 
anthems like Johnny Cash’s “Ragged 
o
ld Flag,” Brooks and Dunn’s “
o
nly in America,” and 
Lee 
 
Greenwood’s “God Bless the USA.” MTV sought to establish a nonviolent tone with 
 
“Imagine,” Bob Marley’s “
o
ne Love,” Prince’s “When Doves Cry,” and Pearl Jam’s “ Alive.”
Artists’ involvement ranged from individual financial contributions to huge mega-events. 
Dr. Dre donated $1 million to a victim’s relief fund. Before the attacks, Bono had teamed up 
with hip hop producer Jermaine Dupri to remake Marvin Gaye’s classic “What’s Goin’ 
o
n” for 
Artists Against AIDS Worldwide; after 9/11, they added the United Way’s September 11 Fund to the list of recipients. Arista rereleased Whitney Houston’s stirring 1991 Super Bowl per-formance of the “Star Spangled Banner,” with proceeds earmarked for New York firefighters. Sony refused to release Michael Jackson’s “What More Can I Give,” recorded with Destiny’s 
Child, Backstreet Boys, Tom Petty, and Seal, among others, because its producer had ties to 
gay pornography. Still, the 
o
ctober 22 United We Stand benefit in Washington, D.C., at which 
it was performed, raised $3 million. Paul McCartney headlined the Concert for New York City  
in Madison Square Garden, which raised $30 million for the New York Fire Department. The By allowing Apple to take the lead and 
essentially set the terms for the online 
sale of digital music, the record industry 
conceded any grasp it might have had 
over the digital realm. The industry’s recovery was not going to be founded on $.99 songs.
430  R o C k IN ’ o UTBeastie Boys organized New Yorkers Against Violence—the only event explicitly committed to 
nonviolent solutions to terrorism—as a two-night fundraiser with guests Moby, Michael Stipe, Bono, Mos Def, and the Strokes.
Perhaps the most impressive happening was America: A Tribute to Heroes, a telethon 
staged on September 21, ten days after the attacks. It featured twenty-two artists, with fifty 
actors staffing the telephones, and was transmitted over the four major commercial networks as well as thirty cable channels without credits or commercial interruptions. Artists included Bruce Springsteen, Celine Dion, Mariah Carey, U2, Sting, Stevie Wonder, Neil Young, Paul Simon, Tom Petty, Billy Joel, Jon Bon Jovi, Richie Sambora, Sheryl Crow, Dave Matthews, Eddie Vedder, Limp Bizkit, Enrique Iglesias, Alicia 
k
eys, Wyclef Jean, Faith Hill, the Dixie 
Chicks, and Willie Nelson. The telethon generated an estimated $160 million from its East Coast broadcast alone, making it the largest single fundraising event in history even before the 
compilation CD was released.
A Tribute to Heroes was an understated event that encapsulated the new role for music. 
Punk, rap, and metal, as performance styles, were excluded because the dominant aesthetic of the tribute was MTV Unplugged. There were no heavy sounds or aggressive rhymes that might have signified discord or disunity; overt expressions of patriotism were downplayed, but understood. Stage sets were unadorned, bathed in soft backlight in the red/orange and blue/green ranges of the spectrum and illuminated by the white light of candles, creating a hint of the colors of the American flag. For security reasons, the program was broadcast from undis-closed locations in New York, Los Angeles, and London. There was no live audience, no stage risers, and no artist introductions or credits; celebrity was consciously obscured in order to engender a sense of what Tom Hanks called “our larger American family.”
The finale of America: A Tribute to Heroes both celebrated and challenged 
the country in a time of crisis.
 C HANGING  C HANNELS 431There were some poignant moments, such as Will Smith’s introducing Muhammad 
Ali as a Muslim or the footage of Muslim children in America expressing fears of retaliation. 
 
Stevie Wonder chastised those who “hate in the name of God or Allah” in his introduction to 
“Love’s in Need of Love Today.” Tom Petty’s mildly aggressive rendition of “I Won’t Back 
Down” was offset by Neil Young’s stirring performance of Lennon’s “Imagine”—one of several performances that led historian Jeffrey Melnick to note the striking ways in which the Tribute  
“anchored itself in the once countercultural sounds of Vietnam War protest and the singing Civil Rights movement and converted them into domesticated vehicles of unity.”
46 A number 
of songs, such as Enrique Iglesias’s “Hero” and Billy Joel’s “New York State of Mind,” were ir-
revocably resignified by the event. Significantly, the all-cast version of “ America the Beautiful” 
that closed the show included the second verse, which calls on America to “Confirm thy soul in 
self-control/Thy liberty in law.”
In contrast to the somber tone of the America Tribute, the Concert for New York City was 
a brash, commercialized, public extravaganza staged at Madison Square Garden on behalf of the city’s police, fire, and health workers, which signified the change in mood and political will taking place as the United States invaded Afghanistan. With minimal diversity provided by Jay-Z and Destiny’s Child, the bill was dominated by British and American rockers, including Billy Joel, Bon Jovi, John Mellencamp, David Bowie, Eric Clapton, the Who, Mick Jagger and 
k
eith Richards, Elton John, and Paul McCartney. Musically, the concert was a tribute to brash, 
white, male, mostly guitar-based rock in both its lineup and performance styles. As headliner,  
McCartney was seen as the primary link between the first British Invasion and the present 
political alliance between Britain and the United States. He showcased “Freedom,” a new song that issued a cautionary warning to anyone who might try to take freedom away. The theme of revenge had been previewed in Bon Jovi’s “Wanted Dead or Alive,” echoing President Bush’s statements about 
o
sama bin Laden. But the Who drove the message home. 
o
pening 
their set with classic Pete Townshend power chords on “Who Are You?”—now a query to the 
 
terrorists—the group performed their high-energy single in front of a Union Jack background and closed with “Won’t Get Fooled Again,” the Union Jack now flanked by two U.S. flags.
Given the imperative for emotional healing following the 9/11 tragedy, the historical 
anti-establishment role of rock might have appeared inappropriate to the crisis. Still, as artists 
rushed to show their support for a grieving nation, many seemed to retreat from long-held 
principles. U2’s defining image of Bono parading with a white flag as he ranted against war on “Sunday Bloody Sunday” was rather different from the U2 at the Super Bowl halftime show in 2002, where Bono displayed the American flag lining of his jacket and the band unfurled a larger-than-life scrim bearing the names of all the 9/11 victims. As talk of helping and healing gave way to the rhetoric of revenge and retribution, those who chose to dissent found that a new reality had taken hold.
Corporate Radio and the New Patriotism
As measured responses to 9/11were eclipsed by a more fervent patriotism in popular culture 
and in government rhetoric and actions, corporate radio played a major role in narrowing the range of cultural expression. Right after the attacks, for example, Clear Channel, the largest As talk of helping and healing gave way 
to the rhetoric of revenge and retribution, 
those who chose to dissent found that a 
new reality had taken hold.
432  R o C k IN ’ o UTradio chain in the United States, issued a list of nearly 200 songs to its member stations that 
executives felt were inappropriate to play. The list included some obvious choices (Metallica’s “Seek and Destroy,” AC/DC’s “Shot Down in Flames”) and some not-so-obvious ones (Carole 
k
ing’s “I Feel the Earth Move,” the Bangles’ “Walk Like an Egyptian”). Its inclusion of all  
Rage Against the Machine songs raised the specter of censorship. Defended by Clear Channel 
as an act of sensitivity toward the victims’ families and denounced by its critics as an act of suppression, the list was part of a running battle between those concerned with civil liber-ties and freedom of expression and those prioritizing the need for national unity and internal security.
What made the Clear Channel list the touchstone for the debate on civil liberties was the 
network’s power, which derived from the terms of the 1996 Telecommunications Act. The 1996 law, twelve years in the making, was the first major overhaul of telecom policy since the Com-
munications Act of 1934; it covered everything from radio, television, and telephone to cable TV and the Internet. The controversial Communications Decency Act attached to the legisla-tion (and declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court one year later), drew attention away from one of the law’s central provisions—the relaxation of cross-ownership rules for media cor-porations. Clear Channel was a clear beneficiary. In 1995, before passage of the bill, Clear Chan-nel owned 43 radio stations. Its expansion took hold with the 1998 purchase of the Jacor radio company—which had itself acquired hundreds of stations after the passage of the 1996 act, as well as EFM Media Management, a program syndicator that employed popular conservative commentator Rush Limbaugh—for $3.4 billion.
47 By the early 2000s, Clear Channel owned over 
1,200 stations in the United States, which took in 20 percent of the industry revenues in 2001; 
it owned over 700,000 billboards; it controlled 65 percent of the U.S. concert business; and it 
posted total revenues exceeding $8 billion.48
In the early 2000s, according to one major news outlet, four companies controlled 90 
percent of radio ad revenue.49 This level of concentration had serious implications for program-
ming. “In one recent week,” reported Rolling Stone in August 2001, “the forty top modern-rock 
stations added a total of sixteen new songs, and the biggest forty-five Top Forty stations added 
a total of twenty.”50 By this time, even major record companies decried the difficulty of break-
ing new artists on radio, and artists complained that if they chose not to perform at a Clear 
Channel concert venue, they would pay the price in radio play.
As the nation went to war against Iraq, Clear Channel adopted a conservative activist 
posture that marked a new role for corporate radio. During this period, demonstrations erupted 
both against and for the war. At first the pro-administration “Rally for America” demonstra-tions appeared to be spontaneous local events and were reported as such. It was then revealed that the rallies were being organized and sponsored by Clear Channel. “While labor unions and special interest groups have organized and hosted rallies for decades,” wrote Tim Jones in the Chicago Tribune, “the involvement of a big publicly regulated broadcasting company breaks 
new ground in public demonstrations.”
51 Added former Federal Communications Commission 
(FCC) commissioner Glen Robinson, “I can’t say that this violates any of a broadcaster’s obli-
gations, but it sounds like borderline manufacturing of the news.”52
Clear Channel’s support for administration policy might have been motivated by its up-
coming business before the FCC—business that would have allowed it to expand considerably,  C HANGING  C HANNELS 433particularly into television. Paul k rugman, writing in the New York Times, traced a direct con-
nection from President Bush to Clear Channel:
The vice chairman of Clear Channel is Tom Hicks … . When Mr. Bush was governor of Texas, 
Mr. Hicks was chairman of the University of Texas Investment Management Company, called Utimco, and Clear Channel’s chairman, Lowry Mays, was on its board. Under Mr. Hicks, Utimco placed much of the university’s endowment under the management of companies with strong 
 
Republican Party or Bush family ties. In 1998 Mr. Hicks purchased the Texas Rangers in a deal 
that made Mr. Bush a multimillionaire.53
It is always threatening to free expression when a public media company enjoys this de-
gree of intimacy with any government agency, let alone the White House. The question is how 
this relationship affected popular music and culture in the post-9/11 context.
Country Music Goes to War
From the buildup of the U.S. war in Afghanistan in 2001 to the U.S. invasion of Iraq in March 2003, the nation’s attention was captured by a number of country songs that followed a rough trajectory from 
thoughtful reflections to strident fight songs. In 
o
ctober 2001, 
Alan Jackson penned “Where Were You (When the World Stopped 
Turning),” a thoughtful rumination on the kinds of things people might have been doing when the World Trade Center towers were struck. It went straight to number one on the country singles chart and crossed over to the Top Thirty on the pop charts. Aaron Tippin weighed in with “Where the Stars and Stripes and the Eagle Fly,” which became the ninth most popular song of 2001. Lee Greenwood’s “God Bless the USA ”—which appeared on four different compilations by the end of 2001—came in at number six for that year and number eleven for 2002. Both talked of 
pride in America and the willingness to pay a price to defend freedom. These songs remarkably found their way into the year-end Top Ten with only a couple of months of sales.
During the buildup of the first Gulf War, Greenwood’s anthem, written in 1984, became 
the title song on his 1990 album of the same name. At that time, Greenwood had turned to patriotism to bolster a flagging career, but his career foundered again by the mid-1990s.
54 The 
9/11 attacks propelled his song back into the upper reaches of the pop charts. Similarly, Tippin 
released “You’ve Got to Stand for Something” in 1991, from his debut album of the same name, 
in the wake of the first Gulf War. The song became a Top Ten hit. A decade later, “Where the 
Stars and Stripes and the Eagle Fly” was a crossover hit that reached the pop Top Twenty. 
o
ther artists also had patriotic entries dating back to the buildup of the first Gulf War, includ-
ing Hank Williams, Jr. (“Don’t Give Us a Reason,” 1990) and Billy Ray Cyrus (“Some Gave All,” 1992).
The events of 9/11 had produced a somewhat reflective patriotism in pop country, but 
the rhetoric surrounding the war in Afghanistan and the increasing demonization of Iraq set a different tone. Toby 
k
eith’s “Courtesy of the Red, White and Blue (The Angry American)” 
from Unleashed (2002) captured the new, vengeful attitude more than any other song. With From the buildup of the U.S. war in  
Afghanistan in 2001 to the U.S. invasion  
of Iraq in March 2003, the nation’s 
 
attention was captured by a number 
of country songs that followed a rough trajectory from thoughtful reflections to strident fight songs.
434  R o C k IN ’ o UTa number of platinum releases to his name, k eith 
was no stranger to stardom, but it was “Cour-
tesy”—which portrayed violence in the name of 
self-defense as the American way—that made 
him a household name, and Unleashed hit number 
one in 2002. In the countdown to the war in Iraq, Darryl Worley’s “Have You Forgotten,” went to the top of the country chart in five weeks, evoking the logic of George Bush’s rationale for the war with a refrain about the U.S. vow to capture those behind bin Laden.
55 Pat Garrett continued in this 
vein with “Saddam Stomp,” which made a second 
mistaken connection between Saddam Hussein, the Iraqi leader, and bin Laden. These were 
followed by Clint Black’s “I Raq and Roll,” which warned America’s enemies to tread carefully, 
and Lynyrd Skynyrd’s “Red, White, and Blue,” a patriotic song whose “love it or leave it” senti-ments provided the group with its first hit in years.
The fact that many of these songs became year-end best sellers suggests that they hit a 
nerve among the U.S. populace, whose support for U.S. foreign policy was still strong during the buildup to Iraq. The momentum they created encouraged artists from other genres to get on board. R. 
k
elly contributed “ A Soldier’s Heart”; Ray Stevens scored with a novelty track 
“
o
sama—Yo’ Mama,” criticizing bin Laden’s mother for not raising him correctly; Neil Young 
released “Let’s Roll,” in honor of the passengers on Flight 93, which presented his more liberal 
rock fans with something of a dilemma.
Conservative country artists posed a problem not because they were resolute in their 
defense of U.S. policy or because their hits were prowar—popular culture had been able to ac-commodate different points of view since the mid 1960s, when Barry McGuire’s “Eve of 
 
Destruction” went head-to-head with Sgt. Barry Sadler’s “Ballad of the Green Berets.” The problem was that they left no room for any other point of view. Steve Earle is a case in point. As much a rocker as a country artist, Earle’s edgy songwriting tends toward outlaw country, and his progressive politics have seldom won him friends in Nashville. As concerned as anyone about 9/11, Earle attempted a complex consideration of the issues at a time when country music 
was moving toward a more strident patriotism. 
o
n “John Walker’s 
Blues”—about John Walker Lindh, the “ American Taliban”—from 
Jerusalem (2002), he attempted to get inside Walker Lindh’s head to 
explore why an American youth searching for truth in Islam would 
take up arms with the Taliban. While Jerusalem was a Top Ten country album that crossed over to pop, Earle was routinely denounced as a traitor by conservative commentators.
The boycott of the Dixie Chicks was even more dramatic. The Dixie Chicks rose to su-
perstardom on the strength of their 1998 multiplatinum major label debut Wide Open Spaces, 
which delivered solid material, great musicianship, and a female trio having a genuinely good time. Their follow-up, Fly  (1999), went to number one, continuing in the same vein except Conservative country artists posed a 
problem not because they were resolute  
in their defense of U.S. policy or 
 
because their hits were prowar—popular 
culture had been able to accommodate different points of view since the mid 1960s, when Barry McGuire’s “Eve of 
Destruction” went head-to-head with 
Barry Sadler’s “Ballad of the Green 
 
Berets.” The problem was that they left no room for any other point of view.
Alan Jackson attempted a thoughtful reflection 
on the tragedy of 9/11, which soon gave way to more strident commentary from country 
artists.
 C HANGING  C HANNELS 435Musical Style Notes
Music has been used to rally the troops since ancient times, from the 
thundering drums of ancient armies to the bagpipes of Scottish regiments. In “Courtesy of the Red, White, and Blue,” Toby Keith also uses layers of 
sound to “rally” his listeners. The song’s structural simplicity (multiple 
verses and a repeating chorus) helps in this regard because it does not distract from the sonic texture and the associations they evoke in the listener. Keith varies the instrumentation to fit the lyrics, using the most 
transparent texture (one solo instrument) to highlight and emphasize cer-
tain lyrics, and then adds layers of sound to build emotion as he works up to 
the defiant chorus, where the drums enter. In the last chorus, the keyboards also use a synthesized effect that results in 
the sound of the melody being played by large bells that are doubled by electric guitar, illustrating the lyric “when you hear mother freedom start a -ringin’ her bell.”
Musical “Road Map”
Timings Commen T s
0:00–0:24 Guitar chord, followed by Verse 1, accompanied by one acoustic guitar.
0:24–0:43 Verse 2
Bass, acoustic, and electric guitar added.
0:43–1:03 Verse 3
Sound texture thickens.
1:03–1:34 Chorus
Drums enter; background vocals enter.
1:34–1:52 Guitar solo
1:52–2:17 Return to Verse 1 texture: vocals and sparse acoustic guitar.
Keyboards layered in the background at a low volume.Note dramatic pause before the “boot” line at 2:11.
2:17–3:14 ChorusThe song’s thickest musical texture happens here.Note bells—these are synthesized and played by a keyboard, and they are doubled by the 
electric guitar.
Song ends with a loud, sustained chord, punctuated by a final stroke of the same chord.
Listening Guide 37“Courtesy of the Red, 
White, and Blue (The Angry American)”
Artist:
 
Toby Keith
Music/Lyrics by Toby Keith Coval
Label:
 
Dreamworks Nashville, 
from the CD Unleashed (2002)436  R o C k IN ’ o UTfor the single “Goodbye Earl,” about the murder of an abusive husband, which caused a stir 
at several country stations. For their September 2002 release, Home, the Chicks went deeper into their country roots with traditional instrumentation. Home debuted at number one on the 
Billboard 200 and garnered not only Country Music Awards, but also American Music Awards, 
People’s Choice Awards, and four Grammys. The Chicks were selected to sing the national anthem at the 2003 Super Bowl. In the spring of 2003, however, while on tour in London, lead singer Natalie Maines told her audience: “We’re ashamed the president of the United States is from Texas,” an obvious reference to George W . Bush’s decision to invade Iraq. Although she apologized to President Bush within days, calling her remarks “disrespectful,” the Dixie Chicks were banned on seventy-four country radio stations owned by Clear Channel and rival radio corporation, Cumulus. The message was clear: It was not an option to criticize the president in wartime.
However, the boycott emboldened the Chicks. At the first show of the U.S. leg of their 
tour, they performed “Truth #2,” about standing up for one’s beliefs, during which they showed 
video footage of civil rights, gay rights, and prochoice demonstrations while slogans like “free-dom” and “truth” were projected on the screen. Maines told her audience, “If you’re here to boo, we welcome that, because we welcome freedom of speech.”
56 Despite the country radio boycott, 
their sixty-two-date U.S. tour nearly sold out. Maines traded barbs with Toby 
k
eith, whose 
“Courtesy of the Red White and Blue” she had called “ignorant.” The jousting reached its cli-
max when Maines appeared on the Country Music Awards telecast wearing an F .U.T.
k
. T-shirt.
The Toby 
k
eith–Dixie Chicks rivalry could be seen as a referendum on the extremes in 
country music over the next few years. 
k
eith’s Shock’n Y’All—possibly a play on 
 
“
o
peration 
Shock and Awe,” the opening campaign in the Iraq War—debuted at number one on the 
 
Billboard 200 in 2003 and placed him at the top of five year-end country charts in 2004. Hav -
ing won a massive conservative country audience with Unleashed, 
k
eith played to these same 
fans on Shock’n Y’All, minus the didactic rants and strident patriotism. 
o
n Honkytonk Uni-
versity (2005), 
k
eith included a shout-out to his “boys in Afghanistan and Baghdad City,” but 
remained essentially focused on 
the hard-core country themes of hard drinking and failed relationships.HEAR MORE
The Dixie Chicks on 
MySearchLab
Before criticizing President Bush, the Dixie 
Chicks were the darlings of the country music scene. The adverse reaction in the country mar-
ket was more than offset by an increase in pop.
The Dixie Chicks underwent a folk-rock makeover for Taking the Long Way (2006), an 
album rooted in country but reflective of their new sophistication as international superstars. 
It debuted at number one on both the pop and country charts, demonstrating a substantial 
country music fan base. Although their tour suffered in some conservative regions, the album’s 
provocative first single, “Not Ready to Make Nice,” made it clear that the Chicks were not ready to back off their views. “I’d rather have a smaller following of really cool people,” said Martie Maguire, “than people who have us in their five-disc changer with Reba McEntire and Toby 
k
eith.”57
Dissent Unplugged
While pro-war anthems emerged as year-end best sellers, almost no protest music was heard 
on the radio. This absence was especially notable by the time of the war in Iraq. Although the U.S. peace movement had initially greeted the war in Afghanistan with ambivalence, it echoed 
worldwide opinion in opposing any invasion of Iraq. Many peace activists began to wonder if 
protest music had died. Writing for the University of Peace, Joseph Schumacher opined:
The sorry state of musical political protest is surprising given that the American, Australian 
and British Governments’ joint invasion of Iraq galvanized global anti war sentiment unlike 
any other single action since the Vietnam War. The millions of people who marched against the war in the weeks preced-ing and during the Iraq invasion sent a powerful message for peace across the world. What has been conspicuously missing is a soundtrack to the phenomenon.
58
In fact, plenty of protest music was being produced; 
it simply wasn’t being aired. Noting that popular music and 
songs had “played a crucial role in the national debate over the 
Vietnam War,” Brent Staples argued in the New York Times  
that “[a] comparable song about George W . Bush’s rush 
to war in Iraq would have no chance at all today. There are plenty of angry people, many with prime music-buying demo-graphics. But independent radio stations that once would have played edgy, political music have been gobbled up by corpora-tions that control hundreds of stations and have no wish to rock the boat.”
59
other observers felt that a climate of intolerance for op-
posing viewpoints had caused many artists to censor them-
selves. “We’ve seen dozens of acts quietly bury their edgier 
songs,” complained Jeff Chang in 2002. “The Strokes pulled 
a song called ‘New York Cops’ from their album and Dave Matthews decided not to release ‘When the World Ends’ as a single.”
60 In 2003, Madonna reportedly withdrew a completed 
video for her “ American Life” single because it portrayed her Protest Music on the Internet  
(Spring 2002–Spring 2003)
Beastie Boys “In a World Gone Mad” (www.beastieboys.com)
Luka Bloom “I Am Not at War with Anyone” (www.lukabloom.com)Billy Bragg “The Price of Oil” (www.billybragg.co.uk)
Chuck D “A Twisted Sense of God” (www.slamjamz.com)
Zack de la Rocha (with DJ Shadow) “March of Death”  
(www.marchofdeath.com)
Nanci Griffith “Big Blue Ball of War” (www.nancigriffith.com)Mick Jones “Why Do Men Fight” (www.poptones.co.uk)Lenny Kravitz “We Want Peace” (www.rockthevote.org)John McCutcheon “We Know War” (www.folkmusic.com)John Mellencamp “To Washington” (www.mellencamp.com)
Meshell Ndegeocello “Forgiveness & Love” (www.meshell.com)Leslie Nuchow “An Eye for an Eye (Will Leave the Whole  
World Blind)” (www.slammusic.com)
R.E.M. “The Final Straw” (www.remhq.com)Spearhead “Bomb the World” (www.spearheadvibrations.com)Cat Stevens “Peace Train” (www.yusufislam.org)System of a Down “Boom!” (www.systemofadown.com)438  R o C k IN ’ o UTwearing Army fatigues, tossing a grenade at a President Bush–like figure. When artists per -
formed controversial protest material, they often paid a price, even if in small ways. Bruce 
Springsteen performed “ American Skin (41 Shots),” about the police killing of 
 
Haitian immi-
grant Amadou Diallo, at one of his New York dates; it cost him his customary after-concert 
police escort to the airport. Jethro Tull was banned from classic rocker WCHR-FM in New Jersey for complaining that drivers who hung American flags from their cars were confusing nationalism with patriotism. “ As far as we’re concerned,” said program director and on-air per-sonality Phil LoCascio, “this ban is forever.”
61
Still, a number of stalwarts continued to release antiwar material. Pearl Jam disparaged 
the president’s leadership on “Bushleaguer” (2002), portraying him as a distinctly minor-
league figure. Public Enemy reinforced this notion on “Son of a Bush” (2003). 
o
n “Combat 
Rock” (2002), Sleater-
k
inney’s Carrie Brownstein pondered the end of the protest song and 
shouted in support of dissent. Given the dearth of protest material, the album that garnered 
all the mainstream press was Springsteen’s The Rising (2002), its thoughtful politics comple-menting the heralded return of the E Street Band. 
o
n songs like “Into the Fire,” “You’re Miss-
ing,” and “Lonesome Day,” Springsteen did what he does best—give voice to the unheard and build bridges among a diversity of groups. In the end, however, The Rising was a retrospective engagement with the intense emotions of 9/11 more than a forward-looking critique of U.S. foreign policy. In the absence of radio play for protest songs, many artists posted songs for free download. (The accompanying table has a sampling of those posted between spring 2002 and 
spring 2003; please note that many links have probably expired.) Nevertheless, in an unfriendly radio climate, the Internet offered only limited possibilities for disseminating protest music.
For the three-year period from 9/11 until the 2004 presidential election, the most pro-
vocative anti-administration songs came from the progressive sectors of punk and rap. Before the invasion of Afghanistan, Anti-Flag—an old-school, explicitly left wing punk band around since 1993—released “911 for Peace” (on Mobilize , 2002), which found singer Justin Sane de-
claring that he wanted neither to die nor to kill. Follow-up The Terror State (2003) took on is-
sues ranging from the war to the economy. That same year, NoFX weighed in with “The Idiot Son of an Asshole,” taunting both Bush presidents with an endless repetition of the song’s title. Green Day delivered a certified antiwar blockbuster with American Idiot in 2004, with “Holi-day” breaking ground by getting adult contemporary radio play.
Despite its penchant for violence, misogyny, and unabashed materialism, rap dispensed 
the fullest and most radical critiques of U.S. foreign policy. After the accidental controversy 
spurred by the cover image for the Coup’s Party Music, one of the first substantive responses to 9/11 was “Makeshift Patriot,” re-leased by slam poet/rapper Sage Francis in 
o
ctober 2001. It opens 
with a live audio track recorded by Francis at Ground Zero five 
days after the attacks. Its extended rap over a churchlike organ cap-
tures the horror and contradictions of that fateful September day. Francis is clear, however, about the outcome: that civil liberties would suffer in the effort to defend freedom.
Some rap responses were more circumspect, reflecting the ambivalence of the rap com-
munity itself. 
o
utkast’s “The Whole World” (2001) presented an impressionistic, gut-level 
response to the initial attacks set to an up-tempo beat. Talib 
k
weli expressed contradictory Despite its penchant for violence, 
 
misogyny, and unabashed materialism, 
rap dispensed the fullest and most 
 
radical critiques of U.S. foreign policy.
 Changing Channels  439feelings toward police and other officials on “The Proud” (2002), accusing them of killing his 
own people and yet admiring them for their selflessness at g
round Zero. On Wu Tang Clan’s 
“Rules” (2001), an angry and bewildered 
g
hostface Killah shows empathy and even respect 
toward Osama bin 
la
den, but when he realizes that his people are dying as a result, he takes 
matters into his own hands, telling Bush to step aside so he can take charge of the current war.
With the 
i
raq invasion looming, some rappers took a more radical stance. Mr. 
l
if, on 
“
h
ome of the Brave” (2002), accused Bush of stealing the presidency, asserted the complicity of 
the media, and suggested that war in the Middle 
e
ast could only divert people’s attention from 
other pressing issues, such as a recession at home. Paris had addressed the 1991 g
ulf War with 
“Bush Killa.” On “What Would You Do?” from Sonic Jihad (2003), whose cover depicts a 747 
about to crash into the White 
h
ouse, he named Bush as having the most to gain from a war 
and accused the administration of creating an enemy to justify its actions. On “Why?” (2004), Jadakiss pointedly accused Bush of knocking down the Twin Towers.
e
ven some higher-profile rap artists expressed dissatisfaction. On “Rule” from Stillmatic  
(2002), 
n
as asked Bush and company to cultivate peace instead of acting like savages. The 
Black 
e
yed Peas scored a major Top Forty radio hit in 2003 with “Where 
i
s the 
l
ove?” (an 
uncredited collaboration with Justin Timberlake), which observed that the real reasons for the 
current war were hidden from view. 
e
minem included some critical verse in cuts like 
 “Business”
 
and “My Dad’s 
go
ne Crazy” on The Eminem Show (2002). For Encore (2004), he (and Dr. Dre) 
produced a 
s
partan album with straightforward lyrics, directing particular enmity at Bush on 
“Mosh” for his refusal to bring the troops home. Many of these songs were released within the chart life of the country singles that dominated the national airwaves. They could have contrib-uted to a national debate but instead received only limited exposure.
s
ome musicians joined Musicians United to Win Without War (MUWWW), a group 
that aligned itself with the broad-based Win Without War coalition, which tried to prevent the invasion of 
ir
aq. MUWWW described itself as “a loose coalition of contemporary musi -
cians who feel that in the rush to war by the Bush administration the voices of reason and de-bate have been trampled and 
 ign
ored.”62 The group included the usual suspects, ranging from 
David Byrne and 
s
heryl Crow to 
a
ni DiFranco and Fugazi, as well as newcomers as diverse 
as Missy 
e
lliot, Dave Matthews, and Bubba 
s
parxxx. 
a
t MUWWW’s founding press confer-
ence, Russell 
si
mmons and Ben Chavis of the 
hip
 
ho
p 
su
mmit 
 ac
tion 
n
etwork joined in the 
name of the hip hop community. Rockers and rappers launched an energetic voter registration 
campaign, quickly signing up nearly 100,000 new voters. Punks took a more aggressive and partisan stance. Under the leadership of Fat Mike from 
n
OFX, they formed Punkvoter (www.
punkvoter.com), dedicated to building a “united front in opposition to the dangerous, deadly, and destructive policies of 
g
eorge Bush, 
Jr.” 
a
s Fat Mike told The Nation, “
i
t’s time to get mad.”63
although the invasion of iraq proceeded apace, all this activ-
ity re
vealed considerable antiwar sentiment and enabled progressive 
musicians to rediscover their historical voice of protest. 
s
ignifi-
cantly, the Win Without War coalition included organizations and individuals who had also protested concentration in the mass me-dia, the erosion of artists’ and consumers’ rights, and the restrictive Significantly, the Win Without War 
coalition included organizations and 
individuals who had also protested 
concentration in the mass media, the 
erosion of artists’ and consumers’ rights, and the restrictive globalization policies of the World Trade Organization 
(WTO).
440  R o C k IN ’ o UTglobalization policies of the World Trade o rga-
nization (WT
o
). Attempting to pull these dispa-
rate strands of activism into a united movement, 
in November 2003, Billy Bragg launched the 
“Tell Us the Truth” tour—which also featured Tom Morello (formerly of Rage Against the Ma-chine) performing as the Nightwatchman, Steve Earle, Lester Chambers of the Chambers Broth-ers, and rapper Boots Riley of the Coup. The tour was sponsored by the AFL-CI
o
, Common Cause, the Future of Music Coalition, Free 
Press, and the Axis of Justice. Around this time, some music industry liberals from Nashville formed Music Row Democrats to make clear that conservatives did not speak for everyone in 
the country music business. Prominent as they were, these voices were neither loud enough to drown out the chorus of nationalist anthems nor sufficiently compelling to recapture the White House for the Democrats in 2004.
Public opinion began to shift against the Iraq War in the run-up to the 2006 midterm 
elections. Before 2005 was out, the Rolling Stones had chastised President Bush on “Sweet Neo-Con,” and System of a Down continued their successful activist progressive rock 
 
career 
with the multiplatinum double album (released in two parts) Mesmerize/Hypnotize , both 
halves of which entered the charts at number one. 
o
n “B.Y .
o
.B.” from Mesmerize, frontman 
Serj 
 
Tankian asked pointedly why presidents don’t fight in wars. In 2006, Anti-Flag kept 
its politics intact on its major label debut, For Blood and Empire, an album brimming with anti-Bush sentiment and criticism of the Iraq War. That year, Neil Young released Living 
with War, a full 180 degrees from his pro-administration stance following 9/11. Described 
by Young as “metal folk protest” on his website, its most controversial cut, “Let’s Impeach the President,” was a straight-ahead rocker that called the White House to task over sending American men to war.
Around this time, the floodgates seemed to open for antiwar material; artists included 
Pink (“Dear Mr. President”), Pearl Jam (“World Wide Suicide”), the Pet Shop Boys (“I’m with Stupid”), the Flaming Lips’ (“Haven’t Got a Clue”), and the Roots (“False Media”). Music Row Democrats released a country compilation album, the MRD Song Pack, featuring many songs directly critical of the president and the war in Iraq, such as Billy Braddock’s “Thou Shalt Not 
k
ill” and Nanci Griffith’s “Big Blue Ball of War.” P . F . Sloan even recorded a new version of the 
classic antiwar song he had written in 1965, “Eve of Destruction.”
Bruce Springsteen’s We Shall Overcome: The Seeger Sessions entered the pop charts at num-
ber three and was certified gold within weeks. Springsteen opened the tour supporting the Throughout the post-9/11 period, Billy Bragg continued to 
 promote the voice of protest in popular music.
 C HANGING  C HANNELS 441album in hurricane-ravaged New o rleans, performing the album’s tunes as well as an updated 
version of Blind Alfred Reed’s “How Can a Poor Man Stand Such Times and Live?” that in-
cluded a pointed reference to “President Bystander.” Interviewed about the federal response 
to Hurricane 
k
atrina, Springsteen had words that echoed Neil Young’s provocative single: 
 “
o
bviously, get rid of the president,” said Springsteen. “When you see the devastation [in New 
o
rleans] and realize the kind of support the city will need to get back on its feet, there’s no 
way to make sense of someone pushing for more tax cuts for the 1 percent of the 1 percent of 
the population. It’s insanity and a subversion of everything America is supposed to be about.”64 
Springsteen added a Seeger song to the tour in an updated version that summed up his feelings 
about the Iraq War—“(If You Love Your Uncle Sam) Bring ’Em Home.”
Despite the reappearance of protest music, the Iraq War survived not only the 2006 
midterm elections but also the ascension to the presidency in 2008 of Barack 
o
bama, the 
first African American president of the United States and the only mainstream candidate to 
have opposed the war from the start. Musical activists turned their attention to other issues. Arizona’s Senate Bill 1070, an anti-illegal immigration measure passed in April 2010 that gave state police new power to question anyone suspected of being an undocumented im-migrant, prompted the Sound Strike, a coalition of music artists led by former Rage Against the Machine frontman Zach de la Rocha who refused to perform in the state and waged pro-test against the initiative. In February 2011, Tom Morello appeared in the Wisconsin capitol 
of Madison in his guise as the Nightwatchman, singing labor songs to the large crowds gathered to protest governor Scott Walker’s efforts to disable the labor unions representing state employees. The 
o
ccupy Wall Street movement, which began in September 2011 as a 
broad-based statement of resistance against the power that corporate capitalism exerted over American and global culture and politics, drew support from a diverse range of 
 
musicians. 
The compilation, Occupy This Album, released in May 2012, collected tracks by ninety-nine artists including Morello, Ani DiFranco, Willie Nelson, David Crosby and 
 
Graham Nash, 
and rapper Immortal Technique. Sounds of protest remained rare on broadcast radio and televi-sion, but grassroots organiz -
ing combined with the Internet maintained and even revived popular music’s key role as a voice of dissent.
After one of the most successful protest 
 careers in popular music with Rage Against the Machine, Tom Morello adopted his new 
persona as the Nightwatchman.
442  r ockin’ outLarry Levan in n ew York; and Juan Atkins, Derrick May, and k evin Saunderson (the Belleville 
t
hree) just outside of Detroit.
n
urtured in this American underground that was predominantly nonwhite and largely 
patronized by gay men for whom dance clubs constituted crucial public spaces, house and 
techno took British club culture by storm in the late 1980s. 
t
echno originally entered Britain 
as a subset of house imports; it was codified as black dance music, but it was not specifically labeled techno until Virgin 
r
ecords released the compilation Techno: The New Dance Sound of 
Detroit in 1988. Aided significantly by the warm physio-psychedelic rush provided by the drug Ecstasy (abbreviated simply as E), the music then became known as acid house. 
t
he particu-
lar mix of cultural elements also produced remarkable gender-bending effects. According to Simon 
r
eynolds, “Gay behavioural codes and modes of expression were entering the body-
consciousness of straight working-class boys, via Ecstasy.”66 After u .S. imports melded with 
British homegrown product and morphed into acid house, the scene outgrew the clubs and 
expanded to all-night events—raves—with crowds of up to 20,000 “turning on, tuning in, and 
freaking out” in aircraft hangers, abandoned warehouses, and open fields along London’s M25 
highway. A moral panic ensued over the drug excesses of the burgeoning rave culture. 
i
n this 
context, the term acid house was dropped and replaced by techno, now used as an umbrella term 
that included electronic dance styles coming out of Europe—a new definition far removed from the music’s Detroit origins. When this later techno was fed back into the 
u
nited States, it was 
bundled with an aura of white European-ness that would remain attached to the music in its subsequent, more widely successful incarnations.
i
n England and other parts of Europe, EDM gave rise to an ever-expanding range of 
subgenres and sub-subgenres, among the most influential of which were jungle—which 
combined reggae samples with deep hip hop bass lines and dense layers of percussion and reasserted dance music’s black basis through artists like Goldie—and trip hop, an ethereal, down-tempo form of hip hop designed mostly for listening that was most readily identified with Massive Attack, 
t
ricky, Por-
tishead, and 
c
alifornia-based DJ Shadow. By the late 1990s, the 
popularity of these artists and styles grew to the point that the 
u
.S. music industry began to take notice and tried to bundle ev-
erything into one category: electronica. 
t
he groups to watch 
included Fatboy Slim, the Prodigy, the 
c
hemical Brothers, 
u
n-
derworld, Daft Punk, and the most recognizable DJ/producer of them all—Moby.
r
eleased in 1999, Moby’s Play was a masterstroke of mu-
sical production and a marketing triumph. All eighteen tracks HEAR MORE
Electronic dance 
 music 
on MySearchLabMixing Sound, Mashing Beats
in the post-9/11 period, getting back to business as usual took on a perverse urgency in the 
music industr
y and more widely. 
t
he simple ability to go shopping became the measure of a 
nation unbowed by terrorism. For many in the music industry, this meant not only recovering 
lost revenues but restoring the dominance of guitar-based rock, as if the familiar sounds of loud 
rock bands offered some reassurance of normalcy. 
c
reed, 
n
ickelback, and Linkin Park were 
among the bands who enjoyed great success in the years following 9/11 by reclaiming com-mercial hard rock, reworked with post-grunge production values and, in Linkin Park’s case, elements of hip hop. A resurgence of singer-songwriters such as John Mayer, Jack 
 J
ohnson, and 
Dave Matthews marked another tendency in which performers evoked past styles as a means of providing reassurance in a time of unrest—although Matthews, whose commercial rise had begun before 9/11, distinguished himself with his multiracial band and activist bent, aligning himself with Farm Aid and Vote for 
c
hange, and playing benefits for 
t
ibet and the victims of 
Hurricane 
ka
trina and the Virginia 
tech shootings
.
While some segments of the pop audience looked to gui-
tar-based music for solace, others preferred electronic, dance-
oriented beats. Since the decline of disco at the end of the 1970s, dance music had remained a potent subcultural force, enjoying a prominence in clubs from Detroit to 
c
hicago to London to i
biza, 
Spain, that transcended its presence on record sales charts. 
i
n effect, from the 1980s forward, 
dance music led a distinctive sort of double life. For mainstream audiences it was embodied in a succession of female pop artists from Madonna and Britney Spears to 
ri
hanna and Lady 
Gaga, who personified the music’s physical allure with their highly eroticized personae. For underground or subcultural club audiences, singing female divas were subordinate to male DJs, whose skill at remixing tracks and building beats into something that could energize a crowd represented a new postmodern kind of virtuosity—one that exchanged the physicality of electric guitar heroics for a more abstract sort of mastery over sound itself as a medium of expression. DJs remained in the background of the most widely successful dance music, as they did in the most popular forms of hip hop, until the end of the twenty-first century’s first decade, when DJs such as David Guetta, Skrillex, and Deadmau5 emerged as major stars in their own right.
Some three decades before that moment, electronic dance music (or EDM, as it would be 
called) began its major post-disco transformations through the near simultaneous rise of house and techno. 
t
heir emergence followed a convoluted, transatlantic path full of ever-evolving 
substyles and scenes, further complicated by conflicting interpretations of musical categories, cross-racial codes, sexual etiquette, the significance of drug use, and the meaning of subcul-tural style.
65 European developments have dominated both the academic discourse and public 
understanding of these musics, at times obscuring their origins, which date back to the late 
1970s and early 1980s in 
c
hicago, Detroit, and 
n
ew York. Long before pivotal British figures 
such as Paul 
o
akenfeld, Danny and Jenni 
rampling
, and 
n
icky Holloway returned from 
i
biza 
to revitalize the stagnant British club scene, the music that had captured their bodies and spir-
its issued from seminal African American DJs/producers like Frankie k
nuckles in c
hicago; 
While some segments of the pop 
audience looked to guitar-based music 
for solace, others preferred electronic, 
dance-oriented beats.
 C HANGING  C HANNELS 443Larry Levan in New York; and Juan Atkins, Derrick May, and k evin Saunderson (the Belleville 
Three) just outside of Detroit.
Nurtured in this American underground that was predominantly nonwhite and largely 
patronized by gay men for whom dance clubs constituted crucial public spaces, house and 
techno took British club culture by storm in the late 1980s. Techno originally entered Britain as a subset of house imports; it was codified as black dance music, but it was not specifically labeled techno until Virgin Records released the compilation Techno: The New Dance Sound of Detroit in 1988. Aided significantly by the warm physio-psychedelic rush provided by the drug Ecstasy (abbreviated simply as E), the music then became known as acid house. The particu-lar mix of cultural elements also produced remarkable gender-bending effects. According to Simon Reynolds, “Gay behavioural codes and modes of expression were entering the body-consciousness of straight working-class boys, via Ecstasy.”
66 After U.S. imports melded with 
British homegrown product and morphed into acid house, the scene outgrew the clubs and 
expanded to all-night events—raves—with crowds of up to 20,000 “turning on, tuning in, and 
freaking out” in aircraft hangers, abandoned warehouses, and open fields along London’s M25 
highway. A moral panic ensued over the drug excesses of the burgeoning rave culture. In this context, the term acid house was dropped and replaced by techno, now used as an umbrella term that included electronic dance styles coming out of Europe—a new definition far removed from the music’s Detroit origins. When this later techno was fed back into the United States, it was bundled with an aura of white European-ness that would remain attached to the music in its subsequent, more widely successful incarnations.
In England and other parts of Europe, EDM gave rise to an ever-expanding range of 
subgenres and sub-subgenres, among the most influential of which were jungle—which 
combined reggae samples with deep hip hop bass lines and dense layers of percussion and reasserted dance music’s black basis through artists like Goldie—and trip hop, an ethereal, down-tempo form of hip hop designed mostly for listening that was most readily identified with Massive Attack, Tricky, Por-tishead, and California-based DJ Shadow. By the late 1990s, the popularity of these artists and styles grew to the point that the U.S. music industry began to take notice and tried to bundle ev-erything into one category: electronica. The groups to watch included Fatboy Slim, the Prodigy, the Chemical Brothers, Un -
derworld, Daft Punk, and the most recognizable DJ/producer of them all—Moby.
Released in 1999, Moby’s Play was a masterstroke of mu-
sical production and a marketing triumph. All eighteen tracks 
HEAR MORE
Electronic dance 
 
music 
on MySearchLab
Although electronic dance music never quite became the Next 
Big Thing, Moby still managed to turn his production wizardry and 
 marketing genius into an extremely lucrative career.444  R o C k IN ’ o UTwere licensed for use in films, television programs, and advertisements before the album peaked 
on the charts (it eventually won multiplatinum certification). According to Wired, “The dozen and a half songs on Play … have been sold hundreds of times for commercials, movies, and TV 
shows—a licensing venture so staggeringly lucrative that the album was a financial success 
months before it reached its multiplatinum sales total.”
67 Moby consolidated his skills on 18  
in 2002. By this time he had become important enough to be verbally attacked by Eminem on 
“Without Me.” Moby’s success remained a rarity, however, and his own stardom would dimin-
ish through overexposure. Electronic dance music stayed largely the province of the under-
ground until a new wave of DJs pushed it further into the spotlight over the next decade.
Copyright Criminals
Electronic dance music’s rise is another indication, like the growth of peer-to-peer file shar-
ing, of the ways in which technology has altered the popular music landscape during the last years of the twentieth century and first years of the twenty-first. The movement’s very name 
suggests the emphasis on technological tools of the trade: as electronic music, it is music that 
relies on digital circuitry to provide the necessary array of sounds and the means to edit and arrange those sounds with exacting amounts of control. Writing about the new approaches to music making that grew with the advent of 
 
digital music technologies in the 1990s, Paul Thé-
berge observed:
Musicians today … often speak of having a unique and personal “sound” in the same manner in 
which another generation of musicians might have spoken of having developed a particular “style” of playing or composing … . [T]he idea of a “sound” appears to be a particularly contemporary concept that could hardly have been maintained in an era that did not possess mechanical or elec-
tronic means of reproduction.
68
Coinciding with this new importance of sound as a creative medium has been the new 
ease with which artists can sample work already recorded by others. Striving to create an 
original sound, EDM artists also—and somewhat paradoxically—base much of their work on 
the reuse of existing material. For some, like DJ Shadow, this has meant years spent “digging 
in the crates,” searching for obscure and forgotten records that might contain a single pas-sage just right for sampling.
69 For others like Moby, it has meant sampling historic record-
ings—several of the tracks on Play drew from field recordings 
of African American folk music made by the influential folklor-
ist Alan Lomax. Using sampling as a basis of their music, elec-
tronic music artists and their counterparts in hip hop have run into the limitations that major music corporations have tried to place on the reproduction of copyrighted material, and at times  
have posed a direct challenge to the enforcement of those limitations.
o
ne of the most controversial releases of sample-based music 
in the 2000s began as a decidedly small-scale production. Using a creative approach known as the “mash-up” that was facilitated by the versatility of digital music files, a little-known artist Using sampling as a basis of their 
music, electronic music artists and 
their counterparts in hip hop have run 
into the limitations that major music 
corporations have tried to place on the reproduction of copyrighted material, and at times have posed a direct 
challenge to the enforcement of those 
limitations.
 C HANGING  C HANNELS 445named Brian Burton, a.k.a. DJ Danger Mouse, fused together the Beatles’ 1968 self-titled album, 
colloquially known as the “White Album,” and Jay-Z’s 2003 release, The Black Album, titling the resultant work The Grey Album. Putting vocal tracks from a special vocal-only version of 
the Jay-Z record together with remixed instrumental tracks drawn from the Beatles, The Grey 
Album was essentially a “bedroom” production made by Danger Mouse on his laptop without record label support.
70
Initially self-released by the artist in early 2004 in a limited run of a few thousand CDs, 
the audacity of The Grey Album combined with Danger Mouse’s success at combining two such 
seemingly disparate sources drew the attention of a variety of major media outlets, including 
Rolling Stone and the New Yorker.71 Also paying attention was EMI, owner of the publishing 
rights to the “White Album,” which took action because Danger Mouse had not obtained the 
right to sample the Beatles’ music. Tellingly, he had not obtained the rights for Jay-Z’s material 
either, but Jay-Z and his record label Roc-A-Fella did not take comparable action—such remix-
ing efforts having long been common in the world of rap.
Danger Mouse agreed to comply with EMI’s cease and desist order and stopped any fur-
ther efforts to distribute The Grey Album. However, a group of Internet music activists called Downhill Battle saw the conflict as an opportunity to draw attention to the manner in which major music corporations were choosing to invoke copyright law to protect their financial in -
terests, while ignoring or denying the possibility for claims of “fair use.” 
o
n February 18, 2004, 
Downhill Battle announced on its website that the forthcoming Tuesday, February 24, would be “Grey Tuesday,” and encouraged other file-sharing websites to collaborate in making The 
Grey Album available for free download as an act of “civil disobedience” against EMI’s efforts to stifle its distribution.
72 When the date arrived, some 300 websites participated, about half 
offering the album for download and thus risking legal action while the others devoted their 
content to spreading news of the protest and the reasons behind it. By the end of the day, it was 
estimated that more than 100,000 people had downloaded the album, making it more widely 
sought than current best-selling releases by such artists as 
o
utkast and Norah Jones.73
The Grey Tuesday protest demonstrated in a way that the Napster controversy had not 
that file sharing websites had the potential to become mechanisms of political and economic 
opposition in relation to the dominant music industry. Meanwhile, Danger Mouse would go on 
to score major hits in conjunction with the “virtual” dance rock group Gorillaz and the soulful 
Gnarls Barkley, among others. Perhaps the broadest implications of the Grey Album , though, 
concern the degree to which it exposed the unresolved status of sample-based music in the current economic climate of the music industry. As copyright scholars 
k
embrew McLeod and 
Peter DiCola noted, “Millions downloaded The Grey Album, and yet no one earned money from those downloads. If the album was so popular and critically acclaimed, why couldn’t a powerful record label make it work?”
74
Two years after the flare-up over The Grey Album, another artist pushed the mash-up 
envelope even further. Gregg Gillis, a Pittsburgh native with a degree in biomedical engineer-
ing from Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, created sample-based music under the 
name Girl Talk. 
o
n his 2006 release Night Ripper, Girl Talk incorporated over 150 sampled 
sources across sixteen named tracks; some individual tracks include close to twenty samples. 
Mixing his sources together, Girl Talk violated boundaries of genre far more thoroughly than 446  R o C k IN ’ o UThad Danger Mouse: He juxtaposed contemporary hip-hop artists such as T.I., Lil Wayne and 
Ludacris with 1970s rock and pop figures such as Boston and Elton John, the pop R&B vocals of Mariah Carey and Alicia 
k
eys, 1990s indie rock by Pavement or the Breeders, and scattered 
sources of even more obscure origin. The result, as described by tastemaker music website 
Pitchfork, was an album marked by “astonishing” pacing, on which “the sampling is pure preci-sion, slotting razor-thin (but highly recognizable) guitar stabs on top of blaring synths on top of anthemic rap couplets and so on, all at breakneck speed.”
75
In the liner notes to Night Ripper, Girl Talk thanked all the artists that he had sampled. 
However, like Danger Mouse, he had not obtained permission to use any of the music he drew 
upon. Even the name of his record label, Illegal Art, suggested a refusal to play by the rules.76 
Yet for reasons hard to explain, the sort of action taken against The Grey Album never material-ized. The possibility of being sued for copyright infringement made it difficult for Illegal Art 
to widely distribute the CD version of Night Ripper, but the album as a piece of work was not 
forced out of the market and tracks circulated widely over the Internet. Illegal Art even con-tributed to its free circulation, offering a no-pay version comprised of separate MP3 files on its website as well as other formats sold for a flexible price structure that allowed the customer to partially determine the final cost. Meanwhile, Girl Talk continued to up the ante with sub-sequent albums Feed the Animals (2008) and All Day (2010), the latter of which was advertised on the Illegal Art website as “clocking in at 71 minutes and 372 samples,” thus more than dou-bling the breadth of Night Ripper.
77
As the cultural profile of Girl Talk continued to rise, the legal status of his music re-
mained shrouded in uncertainty but continued to go unchallenged. In the words of one record 
executive, referring to Night Ripper, “It would have been extremely bad publicity for anyone 
to sue a little label over a record that has barely sold ten thousand copies. Besides, everyone 
I know loves the album. We may be worried about what copyright implications mean for our business, but no one can deny that the album is a cool piece of work.”
78
The DJ as Star
In the fall of 2010, the cell phone company Blackberry debuted a television ad clearly designed 
to appeal to a young demographic. Promoting its new Blackberry Torch phone, the commercial featured Diplo, a DJ then best known for his collaborations with British Sri Lankan dance music 
artist M.I.A. and Swedish singer Robyn. Diplo is shown in the ad as a globetrotting music in -
novator whose lifestyle depends on being able to stay plugged in as he 
moves from gig to recording studio to gig, with a crew that extends from Japan to Jamaica to “outer space.” Writing for the National Public Radio blog “The Record,” Jacob Ganz suggested that the commercial worked far more to the advantage of Blackberry than Diplo—the DJ no doubt got paid well, but Blackberry won a valuable endorsement from a hip trendsetter.
79 Yet the ad may have done the most not for 
Diplo individually but for DJs as a group. It was a clear sign that DJs 
were no longer just background figures or underground heroes. They 
were becoming stars in their own right.An audience of global proportions  
and careers that thrived upon the 
 
interconnectivity afforded by electronic 
communications—these were among 
the primary factors that had elevated DJs like Diplo to star status, and gave  electronic dance music a level of 
 
success and exposure that, in the United States at least, had only been hinted at before.
 C HANGING  C HANNELS 447An audience of global proportions and careers that thrived upon the interconnectivity af-
forded by electronic communications—these were among the primary factors that had elevated 
DJs like Diplo to star status, and gave electronic dance music a level of success and exposure that, 
in the United States at least, had only been hinted at before. In an age when major record labels 
struggled to take advantage of the Internet, EDM had given rise to Beatport, an online market exclusively devoted to the genre started in 2004 that provided an essential forum for DJs to reach music buyers, and by 2012 had sold over 90 million downloads and generated more than $100 million for the labels and artists who used it.
80
Record labels, in turn, came to recognize that DJs had a value that transcended the music 
they made. Atlantic 
 
Records chairman Craig 
k
allman explained, “These individuals aren’t just 
terrific DJs, producers, and hit-makers … they’re curators. Cultural trendsetters and musical 
pacesetters who have an ability to spot talent, as well as build brands that are meaningful to 
consumers, and speak to a really special and unique point of view.”81 Diplo was a case in point—
a former anthropology major whose enthusiasm for Brazilian favela-based funk led him to pro-
duce a documentary film on the subject, and whose own record label Mad Decent functioned as 
“a place where you can find the weirdest things on the outskirts of the Internet.”82
Where music sales were concerned, the DJ who broke the most ground was David 
Guetta. Fittingly, Guetta—a Parisian house music artist whose career dates back to the 1980s, 
and whose reputation grew through a series of parties on the island of Ibiza called “Fuck Me 
I’m Famous”—produced what was, as of summer 2012, the best selling digital single of all 
time, “I Gotta Feeling” by the multiracial hip hop group the Black Eyed Peas. More substan-tially, music released under Guetta’s own name regularly topped Billboard’s dance music charts from 2009 forward, and made significant inroads on the pop charts as well. His breakthrough came with the song “When Love Takes 
o
ver,” featuring vocals by former Destiny’s Child 
singer 
k
elly Rowland, which reached the number one position on the U.S. dance charts in June 
2009 and hit the top position in the U
k
 pop charts at the same time. Success on the pop charts 
truly came with his 2011 album Nothing but the Beat, which peaked at number five, boosted by a host of guest artists drawn from hip hop and r&b, including Nicki Minaj (who sang on the 
number one dance track “Turn Me 
o
n”), Usher, Chris Brown, Lil Wayne, Snoop Dogg, and Sia. 
Guetta said of his success, “What’s interesting is that everything is mixing together—lots of 
DJs have hip-hop influences, trance influences, house influences, electro … and the kids don’t even care, be-cause it’s the internet generation, people listen to all sorts of music.”
83
David Guetta has worked as a DJ and producer 
with some of the most enterprising artists in r&b/hip hop to produce an eclectic mix of 
sounds for the Internet generation.
448  R o C k IN ’ o UT
Listening Guide 38“Turn Me On”
Artist:
 
David Guetta, featuring  
Nicki Minaj
Music/Lyrics: Ester Dean, Onika 
Maraj, David Guetta, and Giorgio Tuinfort
Label:
 
Virgin/EMI (2011), from  
the CD Nothing but the BeatFrench producer David Guetta began his career as a nightclub DJ and has  
become a very prominent producer of club music, particularly in the style 
known as “French house music.” In 2012, Guetta won an American Music 
Award (granted by on-line listener vote) in the category of Electronic Dance 
Music. Nicki Minaj, born in Trinidad, is a flamboyant American rap artist whose versatile and fluid vocal abilities encompass a wide variety of tempos, timbres, characters, and regional accents. The video for the “Turn Me On” 
single was directed by Sanji Senaka, and features a science-fiction-inspired 
setting in which Guetta acts as a type of robotic Dr. Frankenstein character 
who creates a female doll that “morphs” into a pink-haired Minaj.
Musical Style Notes
Guetta is associated with French house music, which like most house or electronic dance music was influenced by 
 American disco and electronica, but also features the type of “hooks” found in American funk. Along with the use of heavy sound processing, the main characteristic of most nightclub dance music is a relentless kick-drum in 4/4 time, 
usually produced by a drum machine or other synthesized source. “Turn Me On” also features the use of “Auto-Tune,” 
a type of sound processing software that can correct or alter the pitch of a voice or instrument. While Auto-Tune was 
 
intended 
 
originally to be used as a corrective device, a high or intense setting can actually distort the sound slightly, 
 
giving a 
 
heavily processed electronic and almost distorted sound to the voice.
Musical “Road Map”
Timings C ommen T s 
0:00–0:14 Minimalistic synthesizer introduction; keyboard “riff” played with the tonic “c” doubled above.
0:15–0:29 Verse 1
Percussion begins on the upbeat; the characteristic “house music” kick-drum sound begins simultane-
ously with the voice track.
The keyboard riff continues.The harmony stays static, with bass playing repeated tonic note “c”; this is the predominant note 
 
being sung as well.Notice that the last lyric of the verse (“coming”) overlaps with the first line of Refrain A.
0:30–0:53 Refrain AClapping is added on beats 2 and 4.
Harmony and melody both begin to be more varied.The intensity of the Auto-Tune processing also increases in the course of the refrain.
0:46–0:53 Synthesizer and percussion tracks cease as vocal “oh” is transformed almost completely into an elec-
tronic sound.
0:53–1:00 Refrain B
The steady 4/4 kick-drum sound temporarily ceases here, replaced by a syncopated rhythm in the 
bass and an additional layer of processed high-hat percussion.
1:00–1:08 At exactly 1:00, an additional layer of percussion is added with a strong beat on 2 and 4.
1:08–1:23 At 01:08, the 4/4 kick drum and the clapping on beats 2 and 4 resume as the vocal refrain repeats. C HANGING  C HANNELS 449
Listening Guide 38Timings C ommen T s 
1:23–1:25 Percussion momentarily ceases over a heavily processed-echo of the vocal “turn me on.”
1:25–1:39 Verse 2
Keyboard riff, 4/4 kick drum, and clapping on beats 2 and 4 resume.
1:39–2:02 Repeat of Refrain A(See 0:30–0:53 above.)
2:02–2:33 Repeat of Refrain B(See 0:53–1:23 –above.)
2:33–2:45 Bridge—new musical material
Kick drum ceases; echo effects in vocal on “palm of your hand.”
2:45–2:46 At vocal “uh uh” the sound dies out as though a turntable were suddenly shut down.
2:47–3:02 Kick drum and synthesizer resume; Minaj raps over sound.At 2:58, kick drum stops over “save me.”
3:02–3:16 Repeat of Refrain BThe beginning of the refrain overlaps with the final syllable of the word “alive” in the rap.Synth, percussion, and clap tracks enter at 3:02 just as in the previous repeat of Refrain B at 2:02.
3:16–3:20 Instrumental track is faded quickly under Minaj’s final “oh” vocal, which then fades as well.450  R o C k IN ’ o UTAnother sort of milestone was reached in 2012 when young American dubstep 
DJ 
 
Skrillex became the first dance music DJ to receive a Grammy nomination for Best New 
Artist. Although he did not receive the award—which went to indie singer/songwriter Bon 
Iver—Skrillex did win three Grammies that year, including Best Dance/Electronic Album 
for Scary Monsters and Nice Sprites (2010), for which he beat out more established figures like 
Guetta and Deadmau5. Skrillex—given name Sonny Moore—began his career as frontman for the emo-hardcore band From First to Last before moving into the world of EDM. Propelled by his Grammy nominations, his 2012 album Bangarang reached number one on the dance charts and Top Twenty on the pop album charts.
Record sales only began to measure the extent of EDM’s rise in 2011–2012, however. It 
was as a live attraction that EDM truly flourished. The Dutch DJ Tiesto climaxed his 2011 tour with an appearance at Carson, California’s Home Depot Center that drew 26,000, the largest 
concert audience drawn by a single DJ headliner. Swedish House Mafia—comprised of a trio of Swedish DJs—sold out the tickets for a December 16 appearance at New York’s 
 
Madison 
Square Garden in just nine minutes. Deadmau5 sold out six consecutive nights at New York’s Roseland Ballroom, breaking a record previously set by Rage Against the 
 
Machine, who sold 
out five nights in 1996.84 DJ stages at large-scale U.S. festivals like Bonnaroo and Coachella 
repeatedly drew crowds in the tens of thousands, and electronic music festivals in cities from 
Miami to Detroit to Las Vegas also drew enormous audiences, with the latter’s Electric Daisy 
Carnival attracting some 230,000 attendees in June 2011, a number that rose to over 300,000 
the following year.
In this flurry of growth in the live music sector for EDM, Deadmau5 (born 
 
Robert 
 
Zimmerman) led the charge. Coming from Toronto, his stage show seemed designed to 
 
address 
the concerns of those who wondered skeptically why anyone would want to pay money to watch a single person play records with no other instruments involved. Calling himself the “Gene Simmons of electronic music,” in concert Deadmau5 appeared behind his DJ booth in an oversized, cartoonish mouse head lit up by thousands of small LED lights.
85 Rolling Stone, 
which featured the DJ on the cover of its July 2012 summer special issue, detailed his exacting 
manner of arranging his live sets:
Zimmerman starts by building his set on his computer, programming whatever songs he 
wants to play into a two-hour collection of discrete six-minute blocks. Then he starts strip -
ping away elements one by one—a kick drum here, a bass loop there … . Finally, in concert, 
he puts it all back together, re-creating each sound with his battalion of 
synthesizers.86
With the theatricality of an arena rock act and a perfor -
mance ethos that drew its values as much from rock as from 
dance pop, Deadmau5 epitomized the efforts of DJs to emulate the 
codes of stardom already in place in the worlds of rock and pop 
as they brought electronic dance music to new levels of worldwide acceptance.With the theatricality of an arena 
rock act and a performance ethos that 
drew its values as much from rock as 
from dance pop, Deadmau5 epitomized 
the efforts of DJs to emulate the codes of stardom already in place in the worlds of rock and pop as they brought 
 
electronic dance music to new levels of worldwide acceptance.
 C HANGING  C HANNELS 451Multimedia Stardom
A key factor in the commercial ascent of EDM DJs was the savvy with which they took advan-
tage of the new opportunities for self-promotion that existed via the Internet by the middle years of the 2000s. Websites for artists such as Tiesto, David Guetta, and Deadmau5 are im-
maculately designed multisensory portals into their work. Facebook and Twitter have in re-
cent years become key tools through which they forge a sense of connection with fans; in an age when a star’s influence could be measured by the number of Facebook friends and Twitter followers, DJs were among the leaders. A telling scenario was described in a Billboard article concerning Skrillex’s collaboration with the heavy metal band 
k
orn. The band made the song 
“Get Up” available for free download on its Facebook page and promoted it to Skrillex’s more than 2 million Facebook fans and 440,000 Twitter followers—gaining 
k
orn 3 million new fans 
in a matter of months and prompting them to record a whole album of similar collaborations with dubstep producers, 2011’s The Path of Totality.
87
Such instances are just the tip of the iceberg. In its December 12, 2005 issue,  BusinessWeek 
announced the emergence of the “MySpace Generation,” a cohort for whom the pioneering 
social media site provided a new forum for making connections through shared interest in 
music and other pop cultural forms.88 Bands both aspiring and established quickly found that 
posting their music on MySpace gave them a way to reach potential listeners that allowed 
them to circumvent the need for record label support. The site became so successful that it 
was purchased that same year by Rupert Murdoch’s NewsCorp for more than $500 million, 
but its users would soon be eclipsed by competing social network site Facebook, such that by 2008—when a consortium of major labels joined with MySpace to create an online music store, MySpace Music—the idea of a “MySpace Generation” seemed hopelessly obsolete.
Facebook and the more recently developed Twitter are not as specifically suited to the 
needs of musicians—they lack unique music pages and are not designed for hosting sound files in the way that MySpace became—but they have become essential tools through which pop music stars have extended their media presence. Through Facebook’s “friending” and 
 
Twitter’s 
“following” functions, stars now offer a kind of accessibility that bolsters and magnifies the 
intimate bond that has historically linked stars and fans. Perhaps more importantly, from an industry perspective, numbers of Facebook friends and Twitter followers became a ready-made index for a star’s popularity and cultural reach. Twitter in particular gained such value that Rolling Stone created a list of “50 Top Tweeters in Music” in early 2011, which was topped by 
k
anye West, known for his “calculatedly quotable Tweets about fur pillows and jogging in 
[clothes by French design house] Lanvin.”89 The list contained two curious omissions, though: 
Lady Gaga, whose 26 million Twitter followers and 53 million Facebook friends as of this 
writing outpaced all competitors, and Justin Bieber, the only person to earn a perfect 100 score 
from 
k
lout, an index that measures overall online influence.
The Internet was not alone in redefining the terms of pop stardom. As record labels 
became folded into multimedia conglomerates that cut across various sectors of the enter-
tainment world, so-called old and new media increasingly intersected with one another. The rap moguls of the late 1990s had in many ways established the model according to which the 
452  R o C k IN ’ o UTbiggest stars of the twenty-first century would operate: making hit records was one part of a 
multilateral branding process through which movies, television, and the Internet all became forums for extending one’s imprint on the pop cultural landscape. Conversely, stories of stars 
in the making assumed a new selling power as well. Television and emerging communications 
and social media worked especially powerfully in conjunction with one another to cultivate what appeared to be a new level of transparency in the workings of the culture industry. Critics and even fans recognized that the “reality” of such representations was largely fabricated and tightly controlled; but such recognition did not diminish the allure of seeing potential stars on the rise, and did not undermine the pervasive notion that in the age of new media, anyone could be a star. No vehicle promoted and capitalized on these trends so successfully as the television show American Idol.
Idol Worship
The model for American Idol  was Popstars , a late-1990s New Zealand television show that 
 
inspired a British variant called Pop Idol  in 2001. Media Svengali Simon Fuller and his 
 
colleagues Simon Cowell and Simon Jones turned the Pop Idol format into an interna -
tional 
 
franchise. In the United States, Fremantle North America, owned by the German 
 conglomerate 
 
Bertelsmann, produced the show. After being turned down by all U.S. networks, 
American Idol was picked up by Fox, owned by media mogul Rupert Murdoch’s conservative 
News 
 
Corporation, headquartered in Australia. Acting on a tip from his daughter in England, 
 
Murdoch reportedly told his executives, “Don’t look at it. Buy it! Right now!”
90 Debuting in the 
summer of 2002, 
 
American Idol quickly became the number one Nielsen-rated television show 
in the country,  averaging 31.6 million viewers a week in 2006.91 By then, it was reportedly 
 
being aired in over 100 countries.
American Idol  is, at root, a giant talent contest of a sort that has been an on-again, off-
again staple of prime time television since the 1950s. However, by all but guaranteeing that the 
winner is given a lucrative recording contract and the promotional support of one of the most powerful record companies in the world—initially BMG (or Sony/BMG after the two compa-nies merged), changed in 2010 to the Universal Music Group—it raised the stakes on any of its 
predecessors. Contestants are also signed to management contracts with 19 Entertainment, Fuller’s massive international artist devel-opment company headquartered in Britain, which oversees the idols’ record and movie deals, live shows, merchandising, and en-dorsements. Standing in for the music industry are the show’s 
judges, who provide criticism and encouragement to the contes-tants but above all serve as voices of experience possessing the abil-
ity to sort the true stars from the pretenders. From 2002 to 2010, Simon Cowell was the personification of the industry’s cruel calculus, his pointed remarks and arrogant persona regu-larly drawing boos and catcalls from the show’s studio audience, making him a figure that viewers loved to hate.
For all the trappings of corporate control built into it, American Idol makes viewers feel 
enfranchised by enlisting them to vote on the results of each week’s performance once the show HEAR MORE
American Idol on 
MySearchLab
From 2002 to 2010, Simon Cowell was 
the personification of the industry’s 
cruel calculus, his pointed remarks 
and arrogant persona regularly drawing 
boos and catcalls from the show’s studio audience, making him a figure that viewers loved to hate.
 C HANGING  C HANNELS 453reaches its final rounds. Although voting participation is inflated because there is no restriction 
on how many times an individual can vote, the number of votes cast in a given season of American Idol is nonetheless staggering. In its first season, the number of total votes cast was 110 million, 
with 15.5 million votes for the season finale. By season eight, aired in 2009, total votes for the 
season had soared to 624 million, with nearly 100 million votes cast for the finale alone, which featured a heated contest between low-key singer-guitarist 
k
ris Allen and flamboyant hard rock 
vocalist Adam Lambert.92 The swelling numbers of votes reflected not only the show’s growing 
popularity but changes in voting procedure, as American Idol producers have continually updated 
the process through deals with cell phone carriers that have allowed voting by text message as 
well as by phone call. In 2011, for the first time the show also allowed viewers to vote online.
Within a few years, naysayers had to admit that American Idol had produced a group of 
democratically elected superstars who had proven themselves in the marketplace. Beginning with 
the first season in 2002, American Idol veterans steadily built their presence in the popular market. First-season winner 
k
elly Clarkson scored the best-selling single of that year with “ A Moment 
Like This,” later included on her debut album, Thankful (2003). Clarkson was at home in front of the camera and able to handle everything from Aretha Franklin covers to middle-of-the-road pop; her first-season victory made it more difficult to dismiss the show out of hand. Ten years after her win, she remained the best-selling artist in the show’s history according to Billboard. All 
five of her albums have entered the charts in the top three, while her most recent number one sin-gle, “Stronger (What Doesn’t 
k
ill You),” reached the top of the Hot 100 chart in February 2012.93
Closely trailing Clarkson in all-time Idol sales was 2005 winner Carrie Underwood. 
The first country singer to emerge victorious, Underwood had that year’s best-selling pop 
single and best-selling country single with “Inside Your Heaven.” Her album Some Hearts  
(2005) charted for the whole of 2006, ending up as 
the number one pop album of the year, something no Idol debut had ever done. As an Idol winner with a 
debut album that was eventually certified six times platinum, Underwood faced an interesting dilemma: How does a singer maintain credibility as a country singer when she is already a pop superstar? For her sophomore album, Carnival Ride (2007), she went deeper into her country roots, contributed a num-
ber of her own songs, and managed to retain her small-town-girl persona despite her incredible suc-cess. In addition to winning numerous music awards, at twenty-six she became the youngest member of 
Kelly Clarkson’s versatility, ease with her audience, and success 
in the marketplace made it more difficult for critics to dismiss 
 American Idol out of hand.
454  R o C k IN ’ o UTthe Grand o le o pry. She was also twice voted “world’s sexiest vegetarian” by People for the 
 Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA). Three of her four albums had reached number one on Billboard’s album chart as of 2012, including Blown Away, released in May of that year.
During its first several seasons, American Idol seemed to promote a reasonably diverse 
cross-section of artists, racially if not stylistically. Although Clarkson and Underwood were 
white women, the winners of seasons two and three were African American (Ruben Studdard and Fantasia Barrino, respectively), as was season six winner Jordin Sparks. However, Sparks’s 
2007 victory was the last by either a woman or a nonwhite contes-tant. Starting in 2008, a new trend asserted itself in the Idol win-ners’ circle that would prove hard to break, as “white guys with guitars” (or WGWG as they were often derisively termed in media reports and online message boards) won every year from 2008 to 
2012. The guitars themselves warranted notice, since for its first several seasons the show had only allowed contestants to sing, ac-
companied by a set of high-caliber studio musicians but not by their own instrumental perfor -
mance. If the show could somehow be understood as a major indicator of popular taste, what did it say about the American public—or at least the portion of it that voted for Idol winners—that nonwhite or female performers no longer seemed to have a chance?
Coincidentally or not, this pattern in the program’s results coincided with a period of 
time during which Idol ’s capacity to create pop music stars from scratch was increasingly called  
into question. Many finalists turned in “less than expected” sales, with several being dropped from their labels. Even respectable gold album sales for his eponymous debut album were not enough to keep 2006 title-holder Taylor Hicks from getting the ax. During this period, Idol’s  
biggest successes came from those who had been voted off the show—Chris Daughtry’s mul-tiplatinum debut with his new rock band, DAUGHTRY; Jennifer Hudson winning an 
o
scar 
for her role in Dreamgirls. 
o
f the white guys with guitars, season ten winner Scotty McCreery 
seemed to fare the best, demonstrating that if Idol continued to have significant impact on the larger popular music market it did so most effectively in the country music arena. Even as the show’s ratings dipped during 2012’s eleventh season, though, its influence remained obvious in the proliferating number of televised vocal competition shows—from NBC’s The Voice and a capella counterpart, The Sing Off, to ABC’s Duets and Fox’s own American Idol competitor, the Simon Cowell-produced X Factor—which suggested that the Idol formula was far from exhausted.
Learning from YouTube
American Idol presents itself as a vehicle through which amateur talents become professionals. 
It highlights this narrative by stressing the youthfulness of its contestants, who initially could only be sixteen to twenty-four years of age (in more recent years the range has expanded to ad-
mit those aged fifteen to twenty-eight). Yet many who appear on the show already have careers 
as working musicians in place. Some have even had recording contracts in the past, leading to charges that the show is trying to stack the deck by featuring talent not nearly as “raw” as it is said to be.If the show could somehow be 
 
understood as a major indicator of 
popular taste, what did it say about the 
American public—or at least the 
 
portion 
of it that voted for Idol winners—that 
nonwhite or female performers no 
 
longer seemed to have a chance?
 C HANGING  C HANNELS 455Those seeking talent in its more raw form could find it on YouTube, the Internet video 
site started in 2005 that had become, by 2011, one of the three most often visited websites 
(along with Google and Facebook). Allowing users to post videos of themselves, YouTube has 
given rise to elaborate online communities of practice wherein nonprofessional musicians of 
various levels of competence watch and often learn from one another. Ethnomusicologist 
k
iri 
Miller has charted the rise of what she calls “amateur-to-amateur” teaching and learning of 
music via YouTube. Analogous to the “peer-to-peer” interactions that have driven music file sharing sites, amateur-to-amateur interactions involve the exchange not just of musical items but musical knowledge and ability—a guitarist who demonstrates elements of technique for other aspiring guitarists, a drummer who provides examples of different kinds of beats.
94 That 
the teacher is nonprofessional can make the lessons more accessible for the novice, offering the 
suggestion that she can do it too.
o
f course, not all amateurs on YouTube are just there to teach or learn from one an -
other. Given the enormous traffic generated by the site, it has become something of a star-
making vehicle in its own right. According to a Rolling Stone report, YouTube had become “the number one source for music in the world” by 2011, eclipsing file sharing sites in the numbers of users it drew and so marking a generational shift away from downloading and toward the streaming of music from the Internet.
95 For established pop music stars, this has 
meant that a dedicated YouTube channel is as necessary as a Facebook or Twitter account 
to maintain the desired level of visibility—and with YouTube’s view counts, stars and their 
record labels can get a quick read on the popularity of a given piece of music as it is made 
available. For aspiring stars, YouTube has taken the place of MySpace as the leading website where an unknown artist can hope to be discovered, or can reach an audience in his or her own right.
o
ne of the most endearing YouTube success stories was that of 
ok
 Go, a Chicago indie 
rock band who were largely unnoticed until their low-budget, self-produced video for the song “ A Million Ways”—which featured the band’s members parodying the dance moves from an  
’N Sync video in singer Damian 
k
urash’s backyard—drew millions of YouTube views in 2005. 
A subsequent video for the song “Here It Goes Again” came out the following year, showing 
the band doing a complexly choreographed routine involving a set of treadmills. It was an even bigger sensation on YouTube and, after going into regular rotation on VH1 and MTV , became a Top Forty Billboard hit.
96
The ultimate YouTube success story was that of Justin Bieber. A fresh-faced, sweet-voiced 
Canadian singer who revived the teen pop phenomenon several years after its bubble seemed 
to have burst, Bieber was only fourteen years old when he drew the notice of manager Scooter 
Braun in 2008 with videos that he and his mother Pattie Mallette had posted on YouTube. Braun 
invited the pair to move to his home city of Atlanta, where he promised to rent them a house and get Bieber a record deal. In just a little over a year, he stirred the interest of r&b singer Usher, whose support helped Bieber to get a recording contract with Island Records, part of the Universal Music Group.
97 From that point forward, Bieber rapidly rose to widespread recogni-
tion. His first album, My World, came out in late 2009 and made it to the top five, with two top 
twenty singles. It was quickly followed in spring 2010 by My World 2.0 , which became Bieber’s 
first number one album and spawned the hit single, “Baby,” featuring a guest rap by Ludacris. 456  R o C k IN ’ o UTThe video for “Baby” became the most watched ever 
on YouTube, with more than 750 million views from its April 2010 release to June 2012.
Interviewed by Forbes magazine, Scooter Braun 
emphasized the role that YouTube played in laying 
the groundwork for Bieber’s success:
We built his YouTube channel over three years. He 
had a bigger YouTube channel before we even did a record deal with Usher. All the statistics pointed at the  
Internet, and kids are spending more time on the In-ternet as opposed to TV and radio, the mainstream didn’t realize the impact because there wasn’t valid-ity till Justin became big. YouTube is bare bones and all we did was use a flip video camera … . At 
the end of the day, the secret to the marketing was to keep it organic and authentic. Make the kids 
realize that it’s theirs. Don’t overproduce the videos. Don’t try and put in special editing.
98
As a marketing tool, YouTube’s power came from the way that it allowed users to feel as 
though they were discovering something for themselves. Like the file sharing networks that 
were the cause of so much record company concern, though, YouTube offered its content for 
free. Although a study by the digital marketing analyst ComScore showed that more YouTube 
viewers watched music video content than any other category of material on the site—40 per -
cent of YouTube’s audience clicked on music content—that viewer-ship did not necessarily translate into record sales.
99 In Justin 
Bieber’s case, while “Baby” drew more YouTube views than any 
other video, the single never reached number one on the charts, 
peaking at number five on the Hot 100. Bieber also stood for the 
ways in which YouTube popularity could be a double-edged sword. 
o
f the millions who 
watched “Baby” on the site, 1.25 million liked it—but it was disliked by more than twice that 
number, 2.7 million. YouTube, then, could be a platform for building stardom, but it also repre-sented the new power that music consumers had in the digital age to use the music industry’s products toward their own ends, or generate products of their own making.
The Future of Music
The opening years of the new millennium were devastating for the major record companies, 
and it was clear that no amount of suing fans, reconfiguring labels, or cutting artists and staff would be enough to stanch their revenue hemorrhage. By 2009, according to the RIAA, U.S. As a marketing tool, YouTube’s power 
came from the way that it allowed users 
to feel as though they were discovering 
something for themselves.
Justin Bieber parlayed a series of home-made YouTube videos into 
one of the most lucrative careers in pop music and almost single-handedly revived the dormant teen pop phenomenon in the process. C HANGING  C HANNELS 457recorded music sales, adjusted for inflation, had plummeted to less than half of what they were 
in 1999.100 Because record companies have occupied the power center of the music business at 
least since the mid-1950s, the sale of prerecorded music has generally been taken as the major indicator of the health of the industry as a whole. But sales data are really only about the health 
of 
 
record companies. Indeed, while these companies have struggled to adjust to the emerging 
digital economy for popular music, live music has emerged as a key—if uneven—area of growth, 
and many artists and fans have actively engaged the changes that have been taking place.
Live Music in the Digital Era
For most artists, CD sales account for relatively little of their income; their main sources of 
revenue come from live performances and merchandise. The state of the industry in the twenty-first century has driven home the importance of concert tours. Accordingly, in 2006, concert 
revenues went through the roof. North American receipts alone hit $2.8 billion, a 35 percent 
increase over the previous year. The dramatic increase in revenue was perhaps not all that surprising given that some of the most lu-crative tours in history—Madonna, the Rolling Stones, U2—were on the road. But it wasn’t just the industry veterans who benefited; newer acts like Rascal Flatts, RBD, Brad Paisley, Tool, and the Black Eyed Peas also fared well and the major destination festivals like Bonnaroo, Coachella, and Austin City Limits attracted huge crowds. What was even more surprising was that, with higher ticket prices, attendance was also up some 14 percent.
101 It ap-
peared that, at a time when audiences could access music through an increasing number of 
media portals, many still yearned to see and hear their favorite artists in the flesh.
Live music’s economic growth in the age of electronic media dovetailed with a trend to-
ward corporate consolidation even more pronounced than that among record companies. The 
worldwide concert business grossed $3.4 billion in 2006, of which $2 billion went to a single company—Live Nation, the concert arm of Clear Channel that was spun off as an independent entity.
102 Live Nation was the result of Clear Channel’s 2000 purchase of SFX Entertainment, 
a company that had made unprecedented inroads in drawing together scores of regional inde-
pendent concert promoters scattered across the United States under a single corporate um-
brella.103 Further intensifying the company’s market domination was a 2010 merger with the 
leading U.S. concert-ticketing firm, Ticketmaster, a deal that raised lingering concerns about 
the degree to which smaller independent promoters could remain competitive.
Live Nation’s power in the entertainment world assumed new dimensions when in 
2007 its artist management wing Artist Nation signed a ten-year, $120 million contract with 
 
Madonna. The deal was one of the earliest of what were called “360” agreements between 
an artist and a music corporation, the term 360 referring to the fact that this was not simply a contract concerning Madonna’s record releases or her live music appearances, but the full range of her activities that might generate revenue, including merchandise, website earnings, and the licensing of songs in films and television (thus the full 360 degrees of her output). Similar deals followed between Live Nation and U2, Jay-Z, Shakira, and Nickelback.
104 Many 
took the fact that these artists chose to sign not with a record company but with a management It appeared that, at a time when 
 
audiences could access music through 
an increasing number of media portals, 
many still yearned to see and hear their 
favorite artists in the flesh.
458  R o C k IN ’ o UTcompany tied to the world’s largest concert promoter as a significant indication of music in-
dustry realignment brought about by the loss of revenue from record sales.
Live music was not infallible, however, and trends in the years that followed suggested 
that the concert business may have overstepped its reach. North American concert reve-
nues declined measurably in 2007. While they rose again by 8 percent in 2008, that year also saw a 2 percent decline in attendance. Many industry veterans noted that the trend of increasing revenues outpacing attendance—higher ticket prices with fewer concertgo-ers—did not augur well for the future. 
o
ne booking agent offered this advice: “Pray, be less 
greedy, superserve the consumer, drop prices, create great tour packages, bundle music with ticket purchases.”
105 Some artists seemed to take the advice to heart. U2 named its 2009 360° 
Tour after its new sound system that enabled the group to play stadium shows in the round, 
thereby expanding the capacity of the stadium and allowing them to achieve higher grosses 
with lower ticket prices. Coldplay gave a free live album to everyone attending its summer 
2009 North American tour.
Revenues rebounded in 2009 but then dropped again, precipitously, in 2010—a year ex-
pected to yield great returns after the approval of the Live Nation/Ticketmaster merger. It 
 
appeared that promoters had finally pushed the envelope on rising ticket costs, and concert 
 
goers expressed their disapproval by staying home, or at least refusing to attend the 
 
overpriced, 
oversized stadium shows that had become the concert industry’s bread and butter. The bright spot was the continued growth of festivals, which remained a significant draw into the second decade of the twenty-first century, as electronic dance music gatherings like the Electric Daisy 
Carnival joined established events like Coachella, Bonnaroo, and the revived Lollapalooza. Speaking to the success of festivals, one member of the concert industry observed, “People would rather spend $250 to $400 for a festival like Coachella and see 30 acts than spend $150 to see two or three acts [at the average stadium show].”
106
Making Music Free
In addition to highlighting the importance of live performance, another effect of the downturn 
in CD sales has been to stimulate new models for selling recorded music. Radiohead provides a case in point. Formed in the late 1980s in 
o
xford, England, Radiohead’s early career took 
shape while the Internet was still of negligible importance to the workings of the music indus-
try. By 2000, when the Napster controversy was at its height, the band had become one of the most artistically adventurous and critically heralded acts in rock. Its last album of the nineties, OK Computer (1997), nearly made the Top Twenty of the U.S. charts and earned the number two spot in the prestigious Village Voice  Pazz & Jop poll of leading pop music critics for best 
album of the year. For its first release of the twenty-first century, Kid A (2000), Radiohead al-
lowed MP3 files of the tracks to circulate on Napster before the album’s release, which height-ened anticipation among the band’s growing 
 
legion of fans. As a result, Kid A  became the 
first 
 
Radiohead album to go to number one when it was 
 
officially released in 
o
ctober of that 
year. The album’s music, meanwhile, featured what was then considered a cutting-edge mix 
of electronic and traditional rock elements, and earned rave reviews, including a rare perfect HEAR MORE
Radiohead on 
MySearchLab C HANGING  C HANNELS 45910 rating from Pitchfork, whose reviewer Brett DiCrescenzo exclaimed that it “completely 
obliterates how albums, and Radiohead themselves, will be considered.”107
Seven years later, Radiohead remained one of rock’s leading acts. Believing that its label 
EMI/Capitol and the other majors were working with an obsolete business model, the band took matters into its own hands. For its 2007 album, In Rainbows, Radiohead had no record 
deal. Instead, on the announced release date of 
o
ctober 10, the band made the album available 
for download on its own website. Even more unusually, there was no price listed alongside the 
downloadable version. Time magazine described what consumers discovered when they tried to 
purchase the album:
Drop In Rainbows’ 15 songs into the online checkout basket and a question mark pops up where 
the price would normally be. Click it, and the prompt “It’s Up To You” appears. Click again and 
it refreshes with the words “It’s Really Up To You”—and really, it is. It’s the first major album whose price is determined by what individual consumers want to pay for it. And it’s perfectly ac-ceptable to pay nothing at all.
108
In the days and weeks that followed, Radiohead’s website drew more than 1 million users 
who downloaded In Rainbows. 
o
f that number, approximately 40 percent chose to pay for the 
album, spending an average of $6. Without record label support, Radiohead had managed to 
generate almost $3 million in sales—and without a record label to take its usual lion’s share of 
the profits, the money all belonged to the 
band.109 When Radiohead did eventually 
offer a compact disc version of the album 
for sale in early 2008, through a deal with 
the independent label AT
o
, it debuted at 
number one on the Billboard album chart, 
despite the large numbers of listeners who had already downloaded the digital version.
The fact that Radiohead understood the power of the 
Internet and trusted its fans at a time when the music business was all about suing its best customers was 
almost as big a story as the fact that the group played 
critically acclaimed, cutting edge music.
460  R o C k IN ’ o UT
The English band Radiohead’s influential CD Kid A, released in 2000, 
signaled a change in the group’s style from the progressive rock influence 
of their earlier works to a more minimal, experimental approach. Recorded 
after a period of creative reflection and gestation, the highly anticipated CD 
was first leaked on Napster, and upon its release went directly to the top of the charts. “Everything in Its Right Place,” the opening track on the Kid A CD, is often played in a slightly different, much longer version as a set-
closer for Radiohead’s live performances.
Musical Style Notes
In many ways, “Everything in Its Right Place” exemplifies the style changes manifested on the Kid A CD, with spare instru-
mentation (electric piano, drum machine, computer-processed vocals) and influences of minimalism and indeterminacy (short, repeated phrases and chord progressions; lyrics that seem randomly chosen from a hat). The understated mix-
ing of the steady quarter-note drum rhythm and its unusual 10/4 set it apart from other dance genres while lending the 
same persistent continuity found in house and club music. The jazz- and mode-influenced harmony is quite unusual, and its minimalistic short, repeated chord changes have their melodic analog in the mosaic of electronically manipulated vo-cal segments and phrases that add layers of texture to the overall sound. Even the lead vocal contains extensive repeti-
tions in both text and musical material.
Structurally, the piece plays with the listener’s expectations. It appears at first to be a standard verse-chorus form, 
with the chorus occurring first as often happens in popular music. However, while the second “verse” retains the chord 
progression of the first, the melodic material and the poetic meter of the text is new. While structure in popular song is often signaled with repetition of a large section of both melodic and harmonic material, the structure of “Everything in Its Right Place” hinges on the manipulation of four chords: C major, Db Major, Eb major, and F major. It is the rearrangement of the order of those four chords that signals different sections (see the “Musical Road Map” below in this text). After the 
second verse, when one is expecting the “Everything in Its Right Place” chorus, we have instead an instrumental section over the chorus’s chord progression. When the chorus lyric does begin again, it is only the first word that is given, and the song winds down with a highly processed vocal on the word “everything.”
Musical “Road Map”
Timings C ommen T s 
0:00–0:34 Introduction
Repeating chord progression: C-Db-Eb.
Short, repetitive, computer-manipulated vocals.At 0:36 the chord progression goes up a whole step to F major.
0:34–1:15 ChorusChord progression under the lyric “everything”:F-C-Db-EbChord progression under the lyric “in its right place”: C-Db-EbMultiple computer-manipulated vocal segments continue.
1:15–1:38 Verse 1
Chord progression: Db-C-Eb-DbVocals: First three repetitions of “yesterday I woke up sucking on a lemon” are intoned on only one 
note. The last repetition ascends to the opening note of the chorus: “everything … .”
At 1:32 chord progression goes up a whole step to F.“Everything in Its Right Place”
Artist:
 
Radiohead
Music/Lyrics: Thom Yorke
Label:
 
Parlophone/Capitol 
(2000), from the CD Kid AListening Guide 39 C HANGING  C HANNELS 461
Timings C ommen T s 
1:38–2:14 Chorus
Chord progression under the lyric “everything”:F-C-Db-EbChord progression under the lyric “in its right place”: C-Db-EbComputer manipulated vocal texture thickens.
2:14
2:35Verse 2
Chord progression: Db C Eb DbVocals: different melodyThe first three lines are sung to the same melody.At 2:35 the last phrase “tried to say” begins to repeat; the last repetition ascends to the opening 
note of the chorus at 2:51, where it overlaps with the beginning F major chord of the chorus.
2:56–3:30
3:16Instrumental interlude over the chord progression of the chorus, which is F-C-Db-Eb
Sound texture becomes thinner; computer-manipulated vocal layers cease, then begin again  
at 3:16.
3:30–4:12 Chorus lyric “everything” begins again, heavily processed; fade begins around 3:59.
Listening Guide 39462  R o C k IN ’ o UTThree years after Radiohead’s maneuver, U2 manager Paul McGuinness issued a widely 
read salvo in the pages of the U
k
 edition of GQ (a portion of which also appeared in 
 
Rolling 
Stone). In “How to Save the Music Industry,” McGuinness complained about the way that 
the idea of “free” had come to set the terms of debate. While “free” music might be great for 
consumers, it was the potential ruin of creators of music, claimed McGuinness, who further observed that record company efforts to seek revenues from advertising, merchandising, and sponsorship were not enough to offset the drastic decline in consumer spending on music. McGuinness thus concluded: “Today, ‘free’ is still the creative industries’ biggest problem. ”
110 
Making such claims, McGuinness seemed to miss—or refuse to acknowledge—the lesson of 
Radiohead’s In Rainbows: that so-called “free” music was not incompatible with the continued 
generation of revenue from record sales. Consumers were not unwilling to pay for music they 
wanted to hear, but they wanted the flexibility of choice that the Internet offered—and that flexibility remained something that the major record companies continued to resist.
Streaming the Long Tail
It remained unclear whether the model pursued by Radiohead for the release of In Rainbows  
had a wider sort of viability. When Radiohead issued the album, it already had a large base of 
fans and a reputation for being a band that stretched the rules of making records. Could an 
unknown, unsigned band starting from scratch succeed using the same strategy? Some in-
dications suggested that it could, especially from within the world of hip hop, where up-and-coming artists like Mac Miller and Wale used the release of free online mixtapes to generate significant sales for their officially produced albums at the end of 2011. Even then, whether such an approach could yield longer-term, career-sustaining results was far from certain.
111
What was clear was that the digitization of music was an irreversible trend and the music 
industry would have to come up with a business model that did not rely on traditional methods 
for selling recordings. In 2011, for the first time, digital sales constituted more than 50 percent 
of all music sold in the U.S.112 Although overall album sales also increased that year for the first 
time since 2004, it was not enough to offset the overall losses that the industry had sustained 
during the past decade. Instead, digital sales were becoming a larger piece of a smaller pie. Mean-
while, evidence suggested that independent labels were better poised to take advantage of these 
changes. In 2007, EMI became the only major label to post a larger share of the digital market than the physical one. In contrast, every independent distributor reported a higher percentage of digital sales than physical sales. According to Billboard, “Indies are better-positioned to do well in an online era. Their audience tends to be younger and more tech-savvy and the sheer number of indie labels and their vast back catalogs are suited to capture the Long Tail market.”
113
In the past few years, the idea of a long tail market has become one of the most salient 
features of what the future music business might look like. The idea derived from an article 
written by Wired editor Chris Anderson in 2004, then expanded into a book.114 In the book, 
Anderson argued that the conventional music industry logic that only 10 percent of all re-leases are profitable is based on the scarcity of space for physical products. A bricks-and-
mortar retailer like Wal-Mart, for example, has to sell about 100,000 copies of a CD to cover 
its overhead. Artists who can sell in the 50,000 range never even make it into the store—and  C HANGING  C HANNELS 463these are precisely the artists that the major labels have been pruning from their rosters. In a 
hit-driven culture, one imagines that demand drops off so sharply for anything less than a hit that there is little reason to expect it to generate any profit. But if 
one imagines a digital world with no manufacturing costs to speak 
of, no distribution costs, and no requirements for shelf space, a rather different economic picture emerges.
When Anderson first formulated his conception of the long 
tail, one of his primary examples was the music subscription service Rhapsody, which offered hundreds of thousands of tracks to its cus-tomers (and currently advertises itself as offering several million). As with physical retailers, demand for the most popular tracks on Rhapsody was high, and fell off rapidly. But at the point where physical retailers ceased stock-
ing any more CDs, demand at Rhapsody kept going. “Not only is every one of Rhapsody’s top 100,000 tracks streamed at least once each month,” said Anderson, “the same is true for its top 200,000, top 300,000, and top 400,000.”
115 In the process, people discovered that their taste may 
not be as hit-bound as they thought. This is the long tail. To give some idea of just how profit-
able the long tail economy can be, consider that “Rhapsody streams more songs each month 
beyond its top 10,000 than it does its top 10,000.”116 The picture that emerged was that of a 
bifurcated industry in which the entities comprising the back end of the long tail could, in the 
aggregate, rival the major companies for market share. This scenario holds promise for artists 
at all levels of the business, from obscure blues singers to genre-defying newbies.
Anderson’s thesis about the long tail stirred considerable unrest and, in some quarters, dis-
agreement about just how decentralized the media industries were becoming. Less disputable was 
the fact that, after years of consumer resistance to the subscription model of music purchasing pioneered by Rhapsody, the idea began to take hold. New music subscription competitors prolif-erated in the 2010s, and industry leaders like Paul McGuinness proclaimed such services to hold the key to the music industry’s future. Leading the charge was Spotify, first introduced to Euro-pean music fans in 2008 and made available in the United States starting in July 2011. 
 
Spotify 
was tailored to the needs of listeners in an age of social media, encouraging its users to share 
playlists with their friends and joining with Facebook to promote greater integration of music content on the social networking giant’s site.
117 offering both free and paid subscription options, 
Spotify struck deals with all major record labels to ensure a deep catalog of over 15 
 
million songs, 
offering them in return royalties paid each time a track was played (a system that was also being 
implemented by YouTube and other streaming media platforms). Whether the income generated 
from such a model would sufficiently compensate for what appeared to be a permanent loss of record sale revenue was the question on which the industry’s future would hang.
It is certain that, in the near term, the major labels will keep their antennae attuned to 
potential blockbusters, but there is also mounting evidence that the future of the music busi-ness will be as much about niches as about hits, to use Anderson’s terms. However record com-panies earn their profits (or fail to do so), musicians and audiences in the twenty-first century appeared to have more options, rather than fewer, for making their music heard or obtaining the music they wanted to hear. That musical niches and microgenres could flourish in an age 
of new media was evident across the range of popular music styles: hip hop, electronic dance In a hit-driven culture, one imagines 
that demand drops off so sharply for 
anything less than a hit that there is 
little reason to expect it to generate 
any profit. But if one imagines a digital world with no manufacturing costs to speak of, no distribution costs, and no 
requirements for shelf space, a rather 
different economic picture emerges.
464  R o C k IN ’ o UTmusic, and heavy metal were among the genres that sustained thriving undergrounds whose 
global reach was indebted to the possibilities of electronic communication. Music was becom-ing not just portable but, as media scholar Anahid 
k
assabian has put it, “ubiquitous”—increas-
ingly everywhere at once in a way that blurred the lines between the personal and the social, 
between music’s public and private uses.118 In the face of music’s ubiquity, questions of taste 
and preference were increasingly tied up with questions of access How  one listened was as im -
portant as what one listened to, and acts of musical discovery happened more and more in the 
virtual world.
As the new millennium dawned, the music industry was hit by a double whammy: Napster and 
its offspring ushered in an era of unauthorized digital music file swapping, and the events of 9/11 knocked the bottom out of the whole economy. While no one questioned that the future of music would be digital, downloadable, and customized for individual taste, the music industry re-mained obsessed with copyright protection and centralized control at the expense of user-friendly services. As a result, the major labels tended to lag far behind the third-party services they should 
have been trying to emulate rather than eliminate. Artists may have been caught in the middle on the copyright question, but record companies were clearly in it for themselves, going after revenues that most often accrued to the labels either as royalties or as artist payback of record-company ad-vances. The majors consolidated their control over a global market, all but eliminated the public domain, and narrowed fair use almost to extinction. Artists themselves continued to derive their income more from touring and merchandising.
The tragedy of 9/11 and subsequent escalation of military engagement brought the more 
conservative elements of country music to the fore, as the push for a more patriotic popular culture captured the attention of the mainstream audience. The more liberal rock establishment seemed ambivalent in its political responses, which ranged from outright protest to serious self-censorship. 
With the passage of time, however, the war in Iraq seemed to spiral out of control, transforming 
public opinion in the process. As the Bush administration sank to its lowest approval ratings ever, protest music resurfaced across genres and the war became the pivotal issue in electing the coun-try’s first African American president in 2008.
The drive to return to business as usual in the post-9/11 period prompted a return to 
the familiar sounds of guitar-based rock, but this trend was countered and in important ways superseded by the prominence of electronic dance music—a genre that owed much to the emerg-ing technologies that had so changed the music industry. Stardom assumed new dimensions in an age of social media. Online platforms like YouTube, Facebook, and Twitter reconfigured the relationship between popular performers and their fans, while the Internet combined with reality television to promote the alluring idea that anyone could be a star. Technology also held out the promise of a deeper sort of transformation. The combination of more powerful computers, broad-band connectivity, inexpensive storage capacity, and democratic avenues of viral communication presented the possibility that thousands of artists selling a few thousand songs each could, in the aggregate, rival the market for hits. In such a future, the prospects for a vibrant musical culture 
seem well within reach.LEARN MORE
Chapter Questions on 
MySearchLab  465Introduct I on
 1.  It should be noted that this discussion concerns 
cultural development as it occurred in European soci-
eties. Of course, any number of other societies devel-oped according to different cultural patterns, but the cultural forms and values of the “New World” were 
informed by those of the European colonial powers; therefore, an understanding of cultural development in European societies is relevant to understanding the tensions and complexities of contemporary U.S. culture.
 
2.
 
Excellent first-hand accounts of this process of 
“plugging” songs can be found in Isidore Witmark and Isaac Goldberg, From Ragtime to Swingtime: The Story 
of the House of Witmark (New York: Lee Furman, Inc., 1939); Charles K. Harris, After the Ball: Forty Years of Melody, An Autobiography (New York: Frank-Maurice, Inc., 1926).
 
3.
 
Lawrence Levine, Highbrow/Lowbrow: The Emer -
gence of Cultural Hierarchy in America (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988); Derek Scott, Sounds of the Metropolis: The 19th-Century Popular Music Revolution in London, New York, Paris, and Vienna (New York: Ox-ford University Press, 2008).
 
4.
 
Keir Keightley, “Taking Popular Music (and Tin 
Pan Alley and Jazz) Seriously,” Journal of Popular Music Studies (2010), 91–92.
 
5.
 
This analysis was developed most forcefully by 
the members of the Frankfurt School, a group of Jewish intellectuals in Germany who were rightly disturbed by Hitler’s effective use of the mass media in advancing the cause of fascism in the 1930s and 1940s.
 
6.
 
Oscar Handlin, “Comments on Mass and Popular 
Culture,” in Culture for the Millions? Mass Media in Mod-ern Society, ed. Norman Jacobs (Princeton, NJ: D. Van Nostrand, 1959), 66.
 
7.
 
Stuart Hall and Paddy Whannel, The Popular Arts 
(New York: Pantheon Books, 1965), 67–68.
 
8.
 
Carl Belz, The Story of Rock , 2d ed. (New York: 
Harper Colophon, 1971), 1.
 
9.
 
Simon Frith, Sound Effects: Youth, Leisure and the 
Politics of Rock ‘n’ Roll (New York: Pantheon Books, 1981), 54. 
10.
 
Bernard Gendron, Between Montmartre and the 
Mudd Club: Popular Music and the Avant-Garde (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2002), 6. 
 
11.
 
Charlie Gillett, The Sound of the City: The Rise of 
Rock and Roll (New York: Outerbridge and Dienstfrey, 1970), i.
 
12.
 
Ibid.
 
13.
 
Frith, Sound Effects, 203.
 
14.
 
Keightley, “Reconsidering Rock,” in The Cambridge 
Companion to Pop and Rock, ed. Simon Frith, John Street, 
and Will Straw (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 109–142; Albin Zak, I Don’t Sound Like No-body: Remaking Music in 1950s America (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 2011).
 
15.
 
Steve Waksman, Instruments of Desire: The Electric 
Guitar and the Shaping of Musical Experience (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1999); Robert Palmer, “The Church of the Sonic Guitar,” in Present Tense: Rock & Roll and Culture, ed. Anthony DeCurtis (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1992), 13–38.
 
16.
 
Waksman, Instruments of Desire, 57–58.
 
17.
 
Peter Wicke, Rock Music: Culture, Aesthetics and So-
ciology (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 
1990), 12.
 
18.
 
Richard Middleton, “Reading Popular Music,” in 
Unit 16 of Open University course U203 Popular Culture. 
(Milton-Keynes: The Open University, 1981), 17.
 
19.
 
Charles Hamm, Yesterdays: Popular Song in America 
(New York: W . W . Norton, 1983), 358.
 
20.
 
H. F . Mooney, “Popular Music since the 1920s: The 
Significance of Shifting Taste,” in The Age of Rock, ed. Jon-
athan Eisen (New York: Vintage Books, 1969), 10, 11.
 
21.
 
Ibid.
 
22.
 
Christopher Small, Music of the Common Tongue: 
Survival and Celebration in Afro-American Music (New York: Riverrun Press, 1987), 25.
 
23.
 
Iain Chambers, Urban Rhythms: Popular Music and 
Popular Culture (New York: Macmillan, 1985), 10.
 
24.
 
Wicke, Rock Music, 16–17.
 
25.
 
Greil Marcus, Mystery Train: Images of 
 
America 
in Rock ‘n’ Roll Music, 5th ed. (New York: Plume,  
2008), 18.notes466  ROCKIN ’ OUT 26.  Chuck Berry, The Autobiography (New York: 
 
Harmony, 1987), 136.
 
27.
 
Tim Brooks, Lost Sounds: Blacks and the Birth of the 
Recording Industry, 1890–1919 (Urbana, IL: University of 
Illinois Press, 2004) documents the early history of black recording artists.
 
28.
 
The use of the terms race  and hillbilly  as market-
ing categories for music was initiated by producer Ralph Peer. The origin of the terms is explained in detail in the next chapter.
 
29.
 
David Brackett, “The Politics and Practice of 
‘Crossover’ in American Popular Music, 1963 to 1965,” The Musical Quarterly (Winter 1994), 777.
 
30.
 
See especially Karl Miller, Segregating Sound: 
 
Inventing Folk and Pop Music in the Age of Jim Crow  
 
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2010).
 
31.
 
Arnold Shaw, Honkers and Shouters: The Golden 
Years of Rhythm and Blues (New York: Collier Books, 
1978), 524.
 
32.
 
See Jerry Wexler and David Ritz, Rhythm and the 
Blues: A Life in American Music  (New York: Knopf, 1993), 
62–63, for Wexler’s account of having begun use of the term “rhythm and blues.”
 
33.
 
“Billboard Adopts ‘R&B’ as New Name for 2 
Charts,” Billboard, 27 October 1990, 35.
 
34.
 
Ibid., 6.
 
35.
 
See Arnold Shaw, The Rockin’ ’50s (New York: 
Hawthorne Books, 1974), 145.
 
36.
 
Ben Fong-Torres, “The Rolling Stone Interview: 
Ray Charles,” Rolling Stone, 18 January 1973, 18.
 
37.
 
Nick Tosches, Country: Living Legends and Dying 
Metaphors in America’s Biggest Music (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1985), 55.
 
38.
 
Shaw, Honkers and Shouters, 497.
 
39.
 
Randy Lewis, “ All-black Top 10 Is a Billboard  Hot 
100 First,” Los Angeles Times, 9 October 2003. http://articles.latimes.com/2003/oct/09/news/wk-quick9. Ac-cessed February 22, 2012.
 
40.
 
Ned Sublette, “The Kingsmen and the Cha-Cha-
Cha,” in Listen Again: A Momentary History of Pop Music , 
ed. Eric Weisbard (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2007), 69–94.
 
41.
 
Robert Duncan, The Noise: Notes from a Rock ‘n’ 
Roll Era (New York: Ticknor & Fields, 1984); Philip Auslander, Performing Glam Rock: Gender and Theatrical-
ity in Popular Music (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Mich-igan Press, 2006).
 
42.
 
Richard Dyer, “In Defense of Disco,” in On Re-
cord: Rock, Pop, and the Written Word, ed. Simon Frith and 
Andrew Goodwin (New York: Vintage, 1990), 410–418; Tim Lawrence, Love Saves the Day: A History of Ameri-
can Dance Music Culture, 1970–1979 (Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 2003).
 
43.
 
“To Censor Popular Songs,” Literary Digest (24 
May 1913), 1181.
 
44.
 
Ibid.
chapter 1
 1.  Cited in Dale Cockrell, Demons of Disorder: Early 
Blackface Minstrels and Their World (New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1997), 45.
 
2.
 
Eric Lott, Love and Theft: Blackface Minstrelsy and 
the American Working Class (New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1993), 18–19.
 
3.
 
Reprinted in W . T. Lhamon, Jr., Jump Jim Crow: 
Lost Plays, Lyrics, and Street Prose of the First Atlantic Pop-ular Culture (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003), 101.
 
4.
 
Charles Hamm, Yesterdays: Popular Song in America 
(New York: W . W . Norton, 1983), 131.
 
5.
 
Lott, “Love and Theft: The Racial Unconscious of 
Blackface Minstrelsy,” Representations (Summer 1992): 
28.
 
6.
 
On the banjo’s African origins, see Dena Epstein, 
Sinful Tunes and Spirituals: Black Folk Music to the Civil War (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2003), 
33–38.
 
7.
 
Hamm, Yesterdays, 214.
 
8.
 
The best account of Foster’s life and career is Ken 
Emerson, Doo-dah! Stephen Foster and the Rise of Ameri-
can Popular Culture (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997).
 
9.
 
Robert Toll, Blacking Up: The Minstrel Show in 
Nineteenth-Century America (New York: Oxford Univer-sity Press, 1974), 275–280.
 
10.
 
Russell Sanjek, American Popular Music and Its Busi-
ness: The First Four Hundred Years, Volume II from 1790 to 1909 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988), 339.
 
11.
 
Hamm, Yesterdays, 288.
 
12.
 
Sanjek, American Popular Music, II, 377. Sanjek 
further states: “The production of pianos and player pia -
nos reached its all-time high in 1899, when more than 365,000 were manufactured, and it continued to average 300,000 annually until just after World War I” (296).
 
13.
 
Hamm, Yesterdays, 285. Ian Whitcomb puts the fig-
ure at 10,000,000 copies over a twenty-year period. See Ian Whitcomb, After the Ball: Popular Music from Rag to Rock (Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1974), 4.
 
14.
 
Sanjek, American Popular Music, II, 365. NOTES 467 15.  It is interesting to note that at this point, the term 
gramophone was dropped from the language in the United 
States (but not in Europe), and phonograph became the generic term for all record players.
 
16.
 
As if to complement the gentility of the series, 
Johnson then introduced the Victrola, the first console 
record player, which featured an enclosed turntable, tone arm, and playback horn, and a price tag of $200.
 
17.
 
Whitcomb, After the Ball, 98–99.
 
18.
 
C. A. Schicke, Revolution in Sound: A Biography of 
the Recording Industry (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1974), 67–68.
 
19.
 
Tim Brooks, Lost Sounds: Blacks and the Birth of the 
Recording Industry, 1890–1919 (Urbana, IL: University of 
Illinois Press, 2005).
 
20.
 
Mark Katz, Capturing Sound: How Technology Has 
Changed Music, rev. ed. (Berkeley: University of Califor-nia Press, 2010), 56–79.
 
21.
 
Hamm, Yesterdays, 290.
 
22.
 
Ibid., 325.
 
23.
 
“The Birth of Our Popular Songs,” Literary Digest  
(7 October 1916), 892.
 
24.
 
Irving Berlin’s America, PBS documentary produced 
by Joann G. Young, 1986.
 
25.
 
Hamm, Yesterdays, 340.
 
26.
 
Jeffrey Melnick, A Right to Sing the Blues: African 
Americans, Jews, and American Popular Song (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999).
 
27.
 
Gunther Schuller, Early Jazz: Its Roots and  
Musical Development (New York: Oxford University Press, 1968), 24.
 
28.
 
Whitcomb, After the Ball, 26.
 
29.
 
Joplin never recorded. The recordings attributed 
to him were actually made from piano rolls he cut. Given the popularity of player pianos at the beginning of the twentieth century, piano rolls became a vehicle for intro-ducing the music of some black artists to mainstream lis-teners. Because there are no recordings of Joplin himself, however, there remains no definitive statement as to the tempo at which he played his compositions.
 
30.
 
Gilbert Seldes, The Seven Lively Arts (1924; reprint 
New York: A. S. Barnes, 1957), 71.
 
31.
 
Hamm, Yesterdays, 321.
 
32.
 
Schuller, Early Jazz, 38.
 
33.
 
Leroi Jones [Amiri Baraka], Blues People (New 
York: William Morrow, 1963), 69.
 
34.
 
Peter Muir, Long Lost Blues: Popular Blues in Amer -
ica, 1850–1920 (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 
2010), 7–9.  35.  Samuel Charters, The Country Blues (New York: 
Rinehart and Company, 1959), 34–35.
 
36.
 
For more on Seals, see Lynn Abbott and Doug 
Seroff, “‘They Cert’ly Sound Good to Me’: Sheet Music, 
Southern Vaudeville, and the Commercial Ascendancy of the Blues,” in Ramblin’ on My Mind: New Perspectives on the Blues, ed. David Evans (Urbana, IL: University of Il-linois Press, 2008), 62–66.
 
37.
 
Charters, The Country Blues, 148.
 
38.
 
William Barlow, “Cashing In,” in Split Image: 
 
African Americans in the Mass Media, 2d ed., ed. Jannette L. Dates and William Barlow (Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press, 1993), 31.
 
39.
 
Robert Palmer, Deep Blues (New York: Viking 
Press, 1981), 100.
 
40.
 
Elijah Wald, Escaping the Delta: Robert Johnson 
and the Invention of the Blues  (New York: Amistad, 2004), 
11–20.
 
41.
 
A number of black jazz musicians, including New 
Orleans trumpeter Freddie Keppard, were asked to re-
cord by recording companies. They declined because they feared that if recorded, their styles could be stud-ied and stolen. As the innovators of jazz styles, African American artists apparently felt that they had more to lose than to gain by engaging with the new technology.
 
42.
 
Russell Sanjek, American Popular Music and Its Busi-
ness: The First Four Hundred Years, Volume III from 1900 to 1984 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988), 23.
 
43.
 
John Storm Roberts, The Latin Tinge: The Impact 
of Latin American Music on the United States (New York: Oxford University Press, 1979).
 
44.
 
Eileen Southern, The Music of Black Americans: A 
History (New York: W . W . Norton, 1971), 347–348.
 
45.
 
Reid Badger, A Life in Ragtime: A Biography of 
James Reese Europe (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995), 89.
 
46.
 
Ruth Glasser, My Music Is My Flag: Puerto Rican 
Musicians and Their New York Communities, 1917–1940  
(Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1995), 57.
 
47.
 
Brooks, Lost Sounds, 280–288; Badger, A Life in 
Ragtime, 213–216.
 
48.
 
Southern, The Music of Black Americans, 353.
 
49.
 
Susan Douglas, Inventing American Broadcasting, 
1899–1922 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1987), 53.
 
50.
 
Michelle Hilmes, Only Connect: A Cultural 
 
History 
of Broadcasting in the United States, 3d ed. (Boston: 
 
Wadsworth, 2010), 44.
 
51.
 
 Gleason L. Archer, History of Radio to 1926 (New 
York: American Historical Society, 1938), 112.468  ROCKIN ’ OUT 52.  Lee de Forest, Father of Radio (Chicago: Wilcox 
and Follett, 1950), 442–443.
 
53.
 
Sanjek, American Popular Music, III, 81.
 
54.
 
Ibid, 166.
 
55.
 
Erik Barnouw, The Golden Web: A History of 
Broadcasting in the United States, 1933–1953  (New York:  
Oxford University Press, 1968), 6.
 
56.
 
Donald Clarke, ed., The Penguin Encyclopedia of 
Popular Music (New York: Viking, 1989), 301.
 
57.
 
Sanjek, American Popular Music, III, 155.
 
58.
 
Ana M. Lopez, “ Are All Latins from Manhattan: 
Hollywood, Ethnography, and Cultural Colonialism,” in 
Film and Nationalism, ed. Alan Williams (Philadelphia: 
Rutgers University Press, 2002), 198.
 
59.
 
Gustavo Pérez Firmat, “Latunes: An Introduc-
tion,” Latin American Research Review (December 2008), 
180–181.
 
60.
 
Roberts, The Latin Tinge, 50.
 
61.
 
Firmat, “Latunes,” 183.
 
62.
 
Sanjek, American Popular Music, III, 110–111.
chapter 2
 1.  Charles Hamm, Yesterdays: Popular Song in America  
(New York: W . W . Norton, 1983), 379.
 
2.
 
Elijah Wald, How the Beatles Destroyed Rock ‘n’ Roll: 
An Alternative History of American Popular Music (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2009), 89.
 
3.
 
Karl Hagstrom Miller has explored the conver-
gence of folkloric research with record company efforts to segregate music along lines of race and region in Seg-
regating Sound: Inventing Folk and Pop Music in the Age of Jim Crow (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2010).
 
4.
 
William Barlow, “Cashing In,” in Split Image: Af-
rican Americans in the Mass Media , 2d ed., ed. Jannette L. 
Dates and William Barlow (Washington, D.C.: Howard 
University Press, 1993), 43.
 
5.
 
Samuel Charters, The Country Blues (New York: Rine-
hart and Company, 1959), 34. Blues historian Peter Muir has recently claimed that in the nineteenth century the word “blues” was most often used in association with the medical condition known as “neurasthenia,” a commonly diagnosed malady associated with melancholy and depression. See Muir, Long Lost Blues: Popular Blues in America, 1850–1920  
(Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2010), 82.
 
6.
 
Gunther Schuller, Early Jazz: Its Roots and  
Musical Development (New York: Oxford University Press, 1968), 37.
 
7.
 
Charters, The Country Blues, 27. 
8.
 
Schuller, Early Jazz, 36.
 
9.
 
Ingrid Monson, “Jazz Chronological Overview,” in 
African American Music: An Introduction, ed. Mellonee V . Burnim and Portia K. Maultsby (New York: Routledge, 2006), 147.
 
10.
 
Wald, How the Beatles Destroyed Rock ‘n’ Roll, 28.
 
11.
 
Bill C. Malone, Country Music U.S.A., rev. ed. (Aus-
tin: University of Texas Press, 1985), 4.
 
12.
 
Charles Wolfe, The Devil’s Box: Masters of Southern 
Fiddling (Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 1997).
 
13.
 
Richard Peterson, Creating Country Music: Fabricat-
ing Authenticity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997), 57–59.
 
14.
 
See Cecelia Conway, African Banjo Echoes in Appa-
lachia: A Study of Folk Traditions (Knoxville: University of 
Tennessee Press, 1995), for extensive discussion of black banjo performance traditions.
 
15.
 
Karen Linn, That Half-Barbaric Twang: The Banjo 
in American Popular Culture (Urbana, IL: University of Il-linois Press, 1991).
 
16.
 
Jeffrey Noonan, The Guitar in America: Victorian 
Era to Jazz Age (Jackson: University of Mississippi 
Press, 2008).
 
17.
 
Steve Waksman with Omar Corrado and Sergio 
Sauvalle, “Guitars,” in Encyclopedia of Popular Music of 
the World, Volume 2: Performance and Production , ed. John 
Shepherd, David Horn, Dave Laing, Paul Oliver, and Pe-ter Wicke (London: Continuum, 2003), 279–291.
 
18.
 
John W . Work, American Negro Songs  (New York: 
Crown Publishers, 1960), 34.
 
19.
 
While Rodgers yodeled on “Sleep, Baby, Sleep” in 
1927, he was not the first to do so on record. According to 
Nick Tosches, that honor probably goes to Riley Puckett, the blind guitarist of the Skillet Lickers, who yodeled three years earlier on the group’s Columbia recording “Rock All Our Babies to Sleep.” The elusive Emmett Miller may have beat them all to yodeling, but he did not record one until 1925, on “Lovesick Blues.” See Nick Tosches, Country: Liv-
ing Legends and Dying Metaphors in America’s Biggest Music  
(New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1985), 110–111.
 
20.
 
Tosches, Country, 194.
 
21.
 
Elijah Wald, Escaping the Delta: Robert Johnson and 
the Invention of the Blues (New York: Amistad, 2004), 28.
 
22.
 
Simon Frith, Performing Rites: On the V alue of Popu-
lar Music  (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1996), 75–95.
 
23.
 
Jones [Baraka], Blues People, 105.
 
24.
 
Ibid., 100 and Daphne Duval Harrison, Black 
Pearls: Blues Queens of the 1920s (New Brunswick, NJ: 
Rutgers University Press, 1988), 46–48. NOTES 469 25.  Many observers, including one of the authors of 
this book, have written disparagingly about the term 
race music. It is likely, however, that Peer simply took his cue from the African American newspapers in which his company advertised—theChicago Defender,  the Pitts-
burgh Courier—which themselves referred to the African 
American community as “the race.” African American scholar Guthrie Ramsey has recently reclaimed the term “race music” as a “kind of positive self-identification” in his book Race Music: From Bebop to Hip-Hop (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003), 3.
 
26.
 
Jones [Baraka], Blues People, 89.
 
27.
 
Charters, The Country Blues, 46.
 
28.
 
Howard W . Odum and Guy B. Johnson, Negro 
Workaday Songs (Chapel Hill: University of North Caro-
lina Press, 1926), 38.
 
29.
 
Eileen Southern, The Music of Black Americans: A 
History (New York: W . W . Norton, 1971), 398.
 
30.
 
David Suisman, Selling Sound: The Commercial 
Revolution in American Music (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009), 216–218.
 
31.
 
Charters, The Country Blues, 67.
 
32.
 
Robert Palmer, “Robert Johnson: The Complete 
Recordings,” Rolling Stone , 18 October 1990. http://
www.rollingstone.com/reviews/album/117645/
review/6067403/thecompleterecordings.
 
33.
 
On the latter-day popularization of Robert John -
son, see Wald, Escaping the Delta, 247–249.
 
34.
 
Lawrence Gushee, Pioneeers of Jazz: The Story of 
the Creole Band (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2005).
 
35.
 
Southern, The Music of Black Americans, 386–387.
 
36.
 
Nathan Pearson, Goin’ to Kansas City (Urbana, IL: 
University of Illinois Press, 1994), 135–147.
 
37.
 
Richard Peterson gives Brockman the greatest 
credit in this transaction for establishing a country mu-sic system of production, which Peer then expanded and refined. See Peterson, Creating Country Music, 17–25.
 
38.
 
Malone, Country Music U.S.A., 39.
 
39.
 
Ibid., 40.
 
40.
 
Ibid., 42.
 
41.
 
One study conducted by Anne and Norm Cohen 
concluded that between 1922 and 1924, only 2 percent of country performers’ repertoires were of British origin. See Malone, Country Music U.S.A., 44.
 
42.
 
Ibid., 52.
 
43.
 
Wald, Escaping the Delta, 47–53.
 
44.
 
For a detailed account of Poole’s career, see Pat -
rick Huber, Linthead Stomp: The Creation of Country Music in the Piedmont South (Chapel Hill: University of North 
Carolina Press, 2008), 103–161.
 
45.
 
Nelson George, The Death of Rhythm & Blues (New 
York: Pantheon Books, 1988), 11.
 
46.
 
Ibid.
 
47.
 
Malone, Country Music U.S.A., 152.
 
48.
 
In an infamous 1935 article, Hammond issued a 
scathing criticism of Duke Ellington, whom he claimed 
had forsaken a true connection with the social and artis-tic concerns of his race in pursuit of heightened sophisti-cation in his music. See David Stowe, Swing Changes: Big Band Jazz in New Deal America (Cambridge, MA: Har-vard University Press, 1994), 50–52.
 
49.
 
John Hammond, On Record (New York: Penguin 
Books, 1981), 163.
chapter 3
 1.  Russell Sanjek, American Popular Music and Its Busi-
ness: The First Four Hundred Years, Volume III from 1900 to 
1984 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988), 176. The dramatic increase of ASCAP’s revenues from 1932 to 1937 came about when eleven music publishing houses con-
trolled by Warner Brothers and representing 20 to 40 per-cent of the music played on the radio returned to ASCAP’s fold. Dissatisfied with their share of publishing revenues, they had decided to collect their own royalties indepen-dently and had left ASCAP in 1935. They returned in Au-gust 1936, freeing up some 36,000 songs—including works by George Gershwin and Jerome Kern—that had been out of circulation since January of that year.
 
2.
 
Nat Shapiro, Popular Music: An Annotated Index of 
American Popular Songs: Volume 2, 1940–1949 (New York: 
Adrian Press, 1965), 6.
 
3.
 
“ ASCAP Defied.” Business Week  (16 November 
1940), 50.
 
4.
 
Minna Lederman, “Music and Monopoly.” The Na-
tion, 28 December 1940, 656.
 
5.
 
Bill C. Malone, Country Music U.S.A., rev. ed. (Aus-
tin: University of Texas Press, 1985), 179.
 
6.
 
Arnold Passman, The Deejays  (New York: Macmil -
lan, 1971), 64.
 
7.
 
Sanjek, American Popular Music, III, 128.
 
8.
 
D. Dexter, “1935–1945, Disk Jockey: Origin of the 
Species.” Billboard (27 December 1969), 58.
 
9.
 
According to the terms of the 1909 Copyright Act, 
only the underlying composition of a recording could be copyrighted; the recording itself could not. As a result, only writers and publishers received royalties from the broadcast of recorded music.470  ROCKIN ’ OUT 10.  Passman, The Deejays, 80. Whiteman and RCA 
Victor had initiated the suit that led to the lower court 
decision.
 
11.
 
Using Ralph Peer’s international business connec-
tions, the companies had also attempted to record U.S. 
pop in Latin America, but the attempt failed. In Cuba, the language barrier prevented English-language re-cordings of broadcast quality. In Mexico, the progressive Mexican musicians’ union refused to participate in the strikebreaking strategy.
 
12.
 
James Kraft, Stage to Studio: Musicians and the 
Sound Revolution, 1890–1950 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996), 156.
 
13.
 
Arnold Shaw, Honkers and Shouters: The Golden 
Years of Rhythm and Blues (New York: Collier Books, 
1978), 124.
 
14.
 
Charlie Gillett, The Sound of the City: The Rise of 
Rock and Roll (New York: Outerbridge and Dienstfrey, 1970), 3.
 
15.
 
Unlike Sinatra, many Italian American performers 
anglicized their names. Frankie Lane began life as Frank Paul LoVecchio, Vic Damone as Vito Rocco Farinola, Tony Bennett as Anthony Dominic Benedetto, and Dean Martin as Dino Crocetti.
 
16.
 
Sherrie Tucker, Swing Shift: “ All-Girl” Bands of the 
1940s (Durham: Duke University Press, 2000).
 
17.
 
Ian Whitcomb, After the Ball: Pop Music from Rag to 
Rock (Baltimore, MD: Penguin Books, 1974), 200.
 
18.
 
Ronnie Pugh, Ernest Tubb: The Texas Trouba-
dour (Durham: Duke University Press, 1996), 64–67;  
Patrick Carr, ed., The Illustrated History of Country  
Music (New York: Random House/Times Books, 1995), 135–141.
 
19.
 
Neil Rosenberg, Bluegrass: A History (Urbana: Uni-
versity of Illinois Press, 1985), 40–95.
 
20.
 
Richard Peterson, Creating Country Music: Fabricat-
ing Authenticity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997), 196–199.
 
21.
 
Gillett, The Sound of the City, 9.
 
22.
 
Leroi Jones [Amiri Baraka], Blues People (New 
York: William Morrow, 1963), 168. Rhythm and blues, of course, developed in the blues tradition of African retentions superimposed on a European melodic and harmonic structure. For a more detailed discussion, see Portia K. Maultsby, “ Africanisms in African American Popular Music,” in Africanisms in American Culture, ed. Joseph E. Holloway (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1990); Reebee Garofalo, “Crossing Over, 1939–1992,” in Split Image: African-Americans in the Mass Me-
dia, 2d ed., ed. Jannette L. Dates and William Barlow 
(Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press, 1993).  23.  George Lipsitz, Class and Culture in Cold War 
America: “ A Rainbow at Midnight” (South Hadley, MA: J. 
F . Bergin, 1982), 195–196.
 
24.
 
Nelson George, The Death of Rhythm & Blues (New 
York: Pantheon Books, 1988), 10.
 
25.
 
Jones [Baraka], Blues People, 160.
 
26.
 
George, The Death of Rhythm & Blues, 9.
 
27.
 
Jones [Baraka], Blues People, 171.
 
28.
 
Shaw, Honkers and Shouters, 278–279.
 
29.
 
Ibid., 289.
 
30.
 
Jim and Amy O’Neal, “Muddy Waters.” Living 
Blues (March/April 1985), 20, 22.
 
31.
 
Robert Palmer, Deep Blues (New York: Penguin, 
1981), 16.
 
32.
 
Donald Clarke, The Penguin Encyclopedia of Popular 
Music (New York: Penguin Books, 1989), 1217.
 
33.
 
David Morton, Sound Recording: The Life Story of a 
Technology (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 
2006), 120–121.
 
34.
 
Edward Zwick, “ An Interview with the Father of 
Hi-Fi: Dr. Peter Goldmark,” Rolling Stone, 27 September 1973, 44–45.
 
35.
 
Ibid., 44.
 
36.
 
Unable to bend like the AM signal, FM waves 
move in a straight line. Therefore, FM transmission suf-fers from a line-of-sight problem: irregular topography and the curvature of the Earth prevent transmission over long distances. However, the quality of the signal in terms of frequency response and suppression of interfer-ence is far superior to AM transmission.
 
37.
 
Sanjek, American Popular Music, III, 173.
 
38.
 
That Rhythm, Those Blues, PBS documentary pro-
duced by George T. Nierenberg, 1988.
 
39.
 
ABC 20/20 , segment on rap produced by Danny 
Schechter, 1981.
 
40.
 
George, The Death of Rhythm & Blues, 41.
 
41.
 
Shaw, Honkers and Shouters, 509.
 
42.
 
Among the popular black deejays in the South 
were “Jockey Jack” Gibson (Atlanta); “Professor Bop” (Shreveport); Larry McKinley and Vernon Winslow (New Orleans); “Sugar Daddy” (Birmingham); “Spi-der” Burks (St. Louis); Bruce Miller (Winston-Salem); and Nat D. Williams, “Bugs” Scruggs, Larry Dean, and George White (Memphis). Southern white r&b deejays included Zenas “Daddy” Sears (Atlanta); Bob “Wolf-man Jack” Smith (Shreveport); Ken Elliott and Clarence “Poppa Stoppa” Hammon (New Orleans); Bill Gordon 
and Dewey Phillips (Memphis); and Gene Nobles and John Richbourgh (Nashville). A number of Southern r&b  NOTES 471recording artists—Elmore James, Rufus Thomas, Sonny 
Boy Williamson, Howlin’ Wolf, Muddy Waters, and B. B. King, among others—had careers as deejays before they became performers. B. B. King acquired his initials from his radio moniker, “the Beale Street Blues Boy.”
 
43.
 
Passman, The Deejays, 175.
 
44.
 
George, The Death of Rhythm & Blues, 41.
 
45.
 
Passman, The Deejays, 185.
 
46.
 
Ibid., 176.
 
47.
 
For the best account of Freed’s career, see John 
Jackson, Big Beat Heat: Alan Freed and the Early Years of 
Rock & Roll (New York: Schirmer Books, 2000).
 
48.
 
Steve Chapple and Reebee Garofalo, Rock ‘n’ Roll Is 
Here to Pay: The History and Politics of the Music Industry  
(Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1977), 56.
chapter 4
 1.  Charlie Gillett, The Sound of the City: The Rise of 
Rock and Roll (New York: Outerbridge and Dienstfrey, 
1970), 1.
 
2.
 
Nick Tosches, Country: Living Legends and Dying 
Metaphors in America’s Biggest Music (New York: Charles 
Scribner’s Sons, 1985), 32.
 
3.
 
Jim Dawson and Steve Propes, What Was the First 
Rock ‘n’ Roll Record? (Boston: Faber and Faber, 1992), xvi–xvii.
 
4.
 
Tosches, Country, 28.
 
5.
 
Robert Palmer, “The Fifties,” Rolling Stone , 19 
April 1990, 48.
 
6.
 
George Lipsitz, Class and Culture in Cold War 
America (South Hadley, MA: J. F . Bergin, 1982), 214.
 
7.
 
Steve Perry, “ Ain’t No Mountain High Enough: 
The Politics of Crossover,” in Facing the Music, ed. Simon 
Frith (New York: Pantheon Books, 1988), 67–68.
 
8.
 
 Greil Marcus, Mystery Train: Images of America in 
Rock ‘n’ Roll Music, 5th ed. (New York: Plume, 2008), 144.
 
9.
 
In San Antonio Rose: The Life and Music of Bob Wills 
(Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1976), Charles R. Townsend suggests that Walker and his friend Charlie Christian (who was to electric jazz guitar what Walker was to electric blues) were themselves influenced by white western-swing electric guitarists Bob Dunn, who played for Milton Brown and His Musical Brownies, and Leon McAuliffe, a steel guitarist for Bob Wills and His Texas Playboys. Robert Palmer argues that Walker’s style is derived from Blind Lemon Jefferson and jazz licks he learned from Christian in “The Church of the Sonic Guitar,” in Present Tense: Rock & Roll and Culture , 
ed. Anthony DeCurtis (Durham: Duke University Press, 1992), 18.
 
10.
 
Palmer, “The Church of the Sonic Guitar,” 16.
 
11.
 
John Storm Roberts, The Latin Tinge: The Impact 
of Latin American Music on the United States (Tivoli, NY: Original Music, 1985), 136.
 
12.
 
Gillett, The Sound of the City, 42.
 
13.
 
For a more detailed discussion of the concentra-
tion of the music industry during this period, see Rich-
ard A. Peterson and David C. Berger, “Cycles in Symbol Production: The Case of Popular Music.” American Socio-
logical Review (April 1975), 158–173.
 
14.
 
Erik Barnouw, The Golden Web: A History of Broad-
casting in the United States, 1933–1953 (New York: Ox-ford University Press, 1968), 221.
 
15.
 
Arnold Shaw, The Rockin’ ’50s (New York: Haw-
thorne Books, 1974), 66.
 
16.
 
Ibid., 235.
  17.  Richard A. Peterson, “Why 1955? Explaining the 
Advent of Rock Music.” Popular Music (January 1990), 113.
 
18.
 
Langdon Winner, “The Sound of New Orleans,” in 
The Rolling Stone Illustrated History of Rock ‘n’ Roll, ed. Jim Miller (New York: Rolling Stone Press, 1976), 42.
 
19.
 
Tony Scherman, Backbeat: Earl Palmer’s Story  
(Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1999), 87.
 
20.
 
Preston Lauterbach, The Chitlin’ Circuit and the 
Road to Rock ‘n’ Roll (New York: W . W . Norton & Com-pany, 2011), 144.
 
21.
 
Rick Coleman, Blue Monday: Fats Domino and the 
Lost Dawn of Rock ‘n’ Roll (Cambridge, MA: Da Capo 
Press, 2006), 20–22, 35.
 
22.
 
John Broven, Rhythm and Blues in New Orleans  
(Gretna, LA: Pelican Publishing Co., 1988), 64.
 
23.
 
Winner, “The Sound of New Orleans,” 46.
 
24.
 
Palmer, “Church of the Sonic Guitar,” 28.
 
25.
 
Charles White, The Life and Times of Little Richard 
(New York: Pocket Books, 1984), 29–30.
 
26.
 
Ibid., 49–50.
 
27.
 
Scherman, Backbeat, 90–91.
 
28.
 
Arnold Shaw, Honkers and Shouters: The Golden 
Years of Rhythm and Blues (New York: Collier Books, 1978), 190.
 
29.
 
Shaw, The Rockin’ ’50s, 210.
 
30.
 
White, Life and Times of Little Richard, 89.
 
31.
 
Johnny Otis, as quoted in Steve Chapple and Ree-
bee Garofalo, Rock ‘n’ Roll Is Here to Pay: The History 472  ROCKIN ’ OUTand Politics of the Music Industry (Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 
1977), 233.
 
32.
 
George Lipsitz, “Creating Dangerously: The Blues 
Life of Johnny Otis,” in Johnny Otis, Upside Your Head! 
Rhythm and Blues on Central Avenue (Hanover, NH: Wes-leyan University Press, 1993), xxiv.
 
33.
 
Johnny Ace was the first major rock ‘n’ roll fatality. 
He died playing with a loaded gun on tour on Christmas day in 1954, just before “Pledging My Love” hit the pop charts.
 
34.
 
Preston Love, introduction to Listen to the Lambs, 
by Johnny Otis (New York: W . W . Norton, 1968), xxxv–xxxix.
 
35.
 
Rubén Guevara, “The View from the Sixth Street 
Bridge: The History of Chicano Rock,” in Dave Marsh, 
ed., The First Rock & Roll Confidential Report (New York: 
Pantheon, 1985), 116.
 
36.
 
Palmer, “Church of the Sonic Guitar,” 22–23; Steve 
Waksman, “The Turn to Noise: Rock Guitar from the 1950s to the 1970s,” in The Cambridge Companion to the 
Guitar, ed. Victor Coelho (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 109.
 
37.
 
Chuck Berry, Chuck Berry: The Autobiography (New 
York: Fireside, 1987), 90–91.
 
38.
 
Ibid., 145, and Dave Pegg, Brown-Eyed Handsome 
Man: The Life and Hard Times of Chuck Berry (New York: Routledge, 2002), 40–41.
 
39.
 
Michael Lydon, Rock Folk: Portraits from the Rock 
‘n’ Roll Pantheon (New York: Dell, 1968), 10.
 
40.
 
Gillett, The Sound of the City, 96–97.
 
41.
 
Berry, The Autobiography, 157.
 
42.
 
Nelson George, The Death of Rhythm and Blues  
(New York: Pantheon Books, 1988), 68.
 
43.
 
Lydon, Rock Folk, 20.
 
44.
 
Charles Shaar Murray, Boogie Man: The Adven-
tures of John Lee Hooker in the American Twentieth Century (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2000), 188–191.
 
45.
 
John W . Rumble, “Roots of Rock ‘n’ Roll: Henry 
Glover at King Records.” Country Music Journal (Vol. 14, No. 2, 1992), 38.
 
46.
 
Robey also bought Duke Records from founder 
James Mattis, who was a deejay for WDIA in Memphis, thus forming the Duke/Peacock complex.
 
47.
 
Shaw, Honkers and Shouters, 479.
 
48.
 
Peter Guralnick, Sweet Soul Music: Rhythm and 
Blues and the Southern Dream of Freedom (New York: Harper and Row, 1986), 26.
 
49.
 
Ray Charles and David Ritz, Brother Ray: Ray 
Charles’ Own Story (New York: DaCapo Press, 1992), 149.  50.  Brian Ward, Just My Soul Responding: Rhythm and 
Blues, Black Consciousness, and Race Relations (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1998), 185.
 
51.
 
Guralnick, Sweet Soul Music, 66.
 
52.
 
Wilson suffered a heart attack on stage in 1975 
and remained in a coma until he died in 1984.
 
53.
 
Tony Heilbut, The Gospel Sound: Good News and 
Bad Times (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1971), 76.
 
54.
 
Among the less memorable answer songs were 
the Midnighters’ “ Annie’s Aunt Fanny,” the El Dorados’ 
“ Annie’s Answer,” Buddy Holly’s “Midnight Shift,” and the Midnights’ (not to be confused with the Midnight-ers) “ Annie Pulled a Humbug.”
 
55.
 
Greil Marcus, “Is This the Woman Who Invented 
Rock & Roll? The Deborah Chessler Story,” Rolling 
Stone, 24 June 1993, 41.
 
56.
 
Ibid., 43.
 
57.
 
Albin Zak, I Don’t Sound Like Nobody: Remaking 
Music in 1950s America (Ann Arbor, MI: University of 
Michigan Press, 2010), 93–95. According to Zak, it is not clear if Goldner’s Gee label was named after his ear -
lier hit, or was merely the spelling of his initial, G.
 
58.
 
Ibid., 191.
 
59.
 
Doo wop groups with predominantly Italian 
American membership included the Mello-Kings (“To-night, Tonight,” 1957), the Elegants (“Little Star,” 1958), the Mystics (“Hushabye,” 1959), and the Capris (“There’s a Moon Out Tonight,” 1961) and, at the periphery of the style, the Royal Teens (“Short Shorts,” 1958) and the Re-gents (“Barbara Ann,” 1961).
 
60.
 
Buck Ram added Zola Taylor to the Platters 
largely for show. Both the Skyliners (“Since I Don’t Have You,” 1959) and the Cleftones (“Heart and Soul,” 1961) also performed with female vocalists who had no readily distinguishable roles.
 
61.
 
Among the groups that could still be associated some-
what with the style were the Duprees (“You Belong to Me,” 1962), the Tymes (“So Much in Love” and “Wonderful, Won-derful,” 1963), the Vogues (“Five O’Clock World,” 1965), and the Fortunes (“You’ve Got Your Troubles,” 1965).
 
62.
 
Max Salazar, Mambo Kingdom: Latin Music in New 
York (New York: Schirmer, 2002), 87–94.
 
63.
 
Ned Sublette, “The Kingsmen and the Cha-Cha-Chá,” 
in Listen Again: A Momentary History of Pop Music, ed. Eric 
Weisbard (Durham: Duke University Press, 2007), 69–72.
 
64.
 
Robert Palmer, Baby That Was Rock and Roll (New 
York: Harvest/HBJ, 1978), 19.
 
65.
 
Steven Loza, Barrio Rhythms: Mexican American 
Music in Los Angeles (Chicago: University of Illinois 
Press, 1993), 82. NOTES 473 66.  Peter Guralnick, Feel Like Going Home: Portraits in Blues 
and Rock ‘n’ Roll (New York: Harper Perennial, 1989), 172.
 
67.
 
Gillett, The Sound of the City, 38.
 
68.
 
Ibid., 30.
 
69.
 
Shaw, Honkers and Shouters, 64.
 
70.
 
Blackboard Jungle was the first Hollywood film 
to include rock ‘n’ roll in its soundtrack, which might 
not have happened without the advocacy of its Tin Pan Alley composers. Rebel Without a Cause, starring James Dean and released that same year, and The Wild One, released in 1954 with Marlon Brando in the lead role, would have been equally obvious choices for rock ‘n’ roll soundtracks, but both used big-band soundtracks, which 
tended to contradict their themes of youth rebellion. For an account of the broader intersection between rock ‘n’ roll and youth-oriented films, including Blackboard Jungle, see Thomas Doherty, Teenagers and Teenpics: The Juvenilization of American Movies in the 1950s , rev. ed. 
(Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2002), 54–82.
 
71.
 
Guralnick, Feel Like Going Home, 172.
 
72.
 
Peter Guralnick, The Listener’s Guide to the Blues  
(New York: Facts on File, 1982), 80.
 
73.
 
Guralnick, Feel Like Going Home, 181.
 
74.
 
Lydon, Rock Folk, 32.
 
75.
 
Gillett, The Sound of the City, 36.
 
76.
 
Peter Guralnick, Last Train to Memphis: The Rise of 
Elvis Presley (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1994), 95–96.
 
77.
 
Peter Guralnick, “Elvis Presley,” in The Rolling 
Stone Illustrated History of Rock ‘n’ Roll, ed. Jim Miller (New York: Rolling Stone Press, 1976), 35.
 
78.
 
Guralnick, Last Train to Memphis, 101.
 
79.
 
Marcus, Mystery Train, 165–166.
 
80.
 
Paul Hemphill, The Nashville Sound: Bright Lights 
and Country Music (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1970), 272–273.
 
81.
 
Guralnick, “Elvis Presley,” 36.
 
82.
 
Guralnick, Last Train to Memphis, 284–286.
 
83.
 
Guralnick, “Elvis Presley,” 36, 38.
 
84.
 
Presley died on 16 August 1977, in Memphis, a 
bloated, drugged-out caricature of his former self.
 
85.
 
Dawson and Propes, What Was the First Rock ‘n’ 
Roll Record?, 192.
 
86.
 
Ibid.
 
87.
 
Tosches, Country, 82.
 
88.
 
Ibid., 95.
 
89.
 
Ted Fox, Showtime at the Apollo (New York: Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, 1983), 207. 90.  For an excellent discussion of these unsung female 
rockabillies, see David Sanjek, “Can a Fujiyama Mama 
Be the Female Elvis? The Wild Wild Women of Rocka-billy,” in Sexing the Groove, ed. Sheila Whiteley (New York: Routledge, 1997), 137–167.
 
91.
 
Rock and Roll: The Early Days, video documentary 
produced by Patrick Montgomery, 1985.
chapter 5
 1.  For a more detailed analysis of this, see Steve 
Chapple and Reebee Garofalo, Rock ‘n’ Roll Is Here to Pay: The History and Politics of the Music Industry (Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1977), 300–304; Peter Wicke, Rock Music: Culture, Aesthetics and Sociology (New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 1990), 30–34.
 
2.
 
Charlie Gillett, The Sound of the City: The Rise of 
Rock and Roll (New York: Outerbridge and Dienstfrey, 1970), 360. It is worth noting that these trends only ap-ply to the market for singles. For albums, it would not be until the mid-1960s that recordings by rock artists dominated the charts, at which point major labels were much more in control of marketing the music. See Keir 
Keightley, “Reconsidering Rock,” in The Cambridge Com-panion to Pop and Rock, ed. Simon Frith, John Street, and Will Straw (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 113.
 
3.
 
Russell Sanjek, “The War on Rock,” Downbeat 
Music ’72 Yearbook (Chicago: Maher Publications, 1972), 16–19, 62–66.
 
4.
 
Mitch Miller, “June, Moon, Swoon and Ko Ko Mo,” 
New York Times, 24 April 1955, 78.
 
5.
 
This situation was complicated when Frank Sina-
tra charged Miller with trying to foist BMI material on him while he was still with Columbia in 1956. In re-sponse, Miller produced statistics that disproved Sina -
tra’s allegation.
 
6.
 
Albin Zak, I Don’t Sound Like Nobody: Remaking 
Music in 1950s America (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 2010), 73.
 
7.
 
Just as Columbia did through its subsidiary OKeh, 
Victor maintained a presence in the r&b market through its Groove subsidiary, founded in 1953. One memorable Groove recording that hit rock ‘n’ roll pay dirt was the ee-rie “Love Is Strange” (1957) by Mickey and Sylvia. Mickey was Mickey “Guitar” Baker, an experienced session guitar-ist; Sylvia was Sylvia Robinson, who formed Sugar Hill Re-cords, the first rap label of note, in the late 1970s.
 
8.
 
Gillett, The Sound of the City, 74.
 
9.
 
For an interesting listing of pop/r&b covers, includ-
ing label and release date, see Philip Ennis, The Seventh 474  ROCKIN ’ OUTStream: The Emergence of Rock ‘n’ Roll in American Popular 
Music (Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University Press/Univer-sity Press of New England, 1992), 223–226.
 
10.
 
Dot achieved the status of a major when it was 
purchased by ABC-Paramount in 1957.
 
11.
 
Gillett, The Sound of the City, 76.
 
12.
 
Robert Cantwell, When We Were Good: The Folk Re-
vival (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996), 
7.
 
13.
 
Chapple and Garofalo, Rock ‘n’ Roll Is Here to Pay, 
49–52, 246–248.
 
14.
 
Gillett, The Sound of the City, 127.
 
15.
 
Ed Ward, Geoffrey Stokes, and Ken Tucker, Rock 
of Ages: The Rolling Stone History of Rock & Roll (New 
York: Rolling Stone Press, 1986), 166.
 
16.
 
Eldridge Cleaver, Soul on Ice  (New York: McGraw 
Hill, 1968), 197.
 
17.
 
Russell Sanjek, American Popular Music and Its 
Business: The First Four Hundred Years, Volume III from 1900 to 1984 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988), 444.
 
18.
 
Arnold Shaw, The Rockin’ ’50s (New York: Haw-
thorne Books, 1974), 176.
 
19.
 
Henry Schipper, “Dick Clark,” Rolling Stone, 19 
April 1990, 70.
 
20.
 
Ibid.
 
21.
 
See James Gilbert, A Cycle of Outrage: America’s Re-
action to the Juvenile Delinquent in the 1950s  (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1986), for a thorough survey of such public concerns.
 
22.
 
Linda Martin and Kerry Segrave, Anti-Rock: The 
Opposition to Rock ‘n’ Roll (New York: DeCapo Press, 1993), 24–25.
 
23.
 
Shaw, The Rockin’ ’50s, 218–219.
 
24.
 
Shaw, The Rockin’ ’50s, 267.
 
25.
 
Sanjek, “The War on Rock,” 18.
 
26.
 
Ibid., 19.
 
27.
 
Ibid., 62.
 
28.
 
Ibid.
 
29.
 
John Jackson, Big Beat Heat: Alan Freed and the 
Early Years of Rock & Roll (New York: Schirmer Books, 1991), 252.
 
30.
 
Trent Hill, “The Enemy Within: Censorship in 
Rock Music in the 1950s,” South Atlantic Quarterly (Fall 1991), 677.
 
31.
 
Kirse Granat May, Golden State, Golden Youth: The 
California Image in Popular Culture, 1955–1966 (Chapel 
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2002), 4. 32.  Chapple and Garofalo, Rock ‘n’ Roll Is Here to Pay, 
52.
 
33.
 
Greg Shaw, “Instrumental Groups,” in The Roll-
ing Stone Illustrated History of Rock & Roll, ed. Jim Miller 
(New York: Rolling Stone Press, 1976), 108.
 
34.
 
Arnold Shaw, Black Popular Music in America (New 
York: Schirmer Books, 1986), 207.
 
35.
 
“500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Beach 
Boys, Pet Sounds ,” Rolling Stone . http://www.rolling-
stone.com/music/lists/500-greatest-albums-of-all-time-20120531/the-beach-boys-pet-sounds-19691231. Retrieved July 5, 2012.
 
36.
 
Gillett, The Sound of the City, 218.
chapter 6
 1.  Bernice Johnson Reagon, “Songs That Moved 
the Movement,” Civil Rights Quarterly (Summer 1983), 
27–35.
 
2.
 
At the time, mass culture was considered to be a 
sign of capitalism at its worst. Thus, it was viewed as an 
irredeemably debased culture, produced only for profit, with no possibility for resistance or opposition, rather than as an arena for cultural struggle. By the end of the decade, politically minded people had begun to rethink this position.
 
3.
 
Nelson George, The Death of Rhythm & Blues (New 
York: Pantheon Books, 1988), 69.
 
4.
 
“Louis Armstrong on Music and Politics,” in Keep -
ing Time: Readings in Jazz History , ed. Robert Walser 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), 247.
 
5.
 
Hail! Hail! Rock ‘n’ Roll, film documentary, di-
rected by Taylor Hackford, 1987.
 
6.
 
Susan Douglas, Where the Girls Are: Growing Up 
Female with the Mass Media (New York: Times Books, 
1995), 85.
 
7.
 
David Hinckley, Liner Notes, Phil Spector Back to 
Mono (1958–1969), Phil Spector Records, 7118–2.
 
8.
 
Tom Wolfe, “The First Tycoon of Teen,” The 
Kandy-Kolored Tangerine-Flake Streamline Baby (New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1965), 69.
 
9.
 
Jacqueline Warwick, Girl Groups, Girl Culture: 
Popular Music and Identity in the 1960s (New York: Rout-ledge, 2007), 127.
 
10.
 
Love has gone on to become an accomplished ac -
tress, perhaps best known for her role as Danny Glover’s wife in the Lethal Weapon films.
 
11.
 
Warwick, Girl Groups, Girl Culture, 190–192.
 
12.
 
Douglas, Where the Girls Are, 97. NOTES 475 13.  Michael Lydon, “Smokey Robinson,” Rolling Stone, 
28 September 1968, 21.
 
14.
 
Gerri Hersey, Nowhere to Run: The Story of Soul 
Music (New York: Penguin Books, 1984), 190.
 
15.
 
Suzanne Smith, Dancing in the Street: Motown and 
the Cultural Politics of Detroit (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1999), 171.
 
16.
 
Richie Unterberger surveys these competing  
perspectives well in Turn! Turn! Turn! The ’60s Folk-Rock Revolution (San Francisco: Backbeat Books, 2002), 1–20.
 
17.
 
Bob Dylan, Chronicles, Volume One (New York: Si-
mon & Schuster, 2004), 272–276.
 
18.
 
George, The Death of Rhythm & Blues, 85.
 
19.
 
Lester Bangs, “The British Invasion,” in The Roll-
ing Stone Illustrated History of Rock ‘n’ Roll, ed. Jim Miller 
(New York: Random House, 1976), 164.
 
20.
 
Greil Marcus, “The Beatles,” in The Rolling Stone 
Illustrated History of Rock & Roll, ed. Jim Miller, Anthony DeCurtis, James Henke, and Holly George-Warren (New York: Random House, 1992), 214. Marcus’s notion of the “pop explosion” is indebted to the work of British musi-cian and critic George Melly.
 
21.
 
Steve Chapple and Reebee Garofalo, Rock ‘n’ Roll Is 
Here to Pay: The History and Politics of the Music Industry  
(Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1977), 70.
 
22.
 
These two shows, currently available on a single 
home video as Born to Rock (UPA Productions of Amer-
ica, 1982), also included African American artists such as Chuck Berry, Bo Diddley, Ray Charles, James Brown, the Ronettes, and Ike and Tina Turner.
 
23.
 
Hersey, Nowhere to Run, 185.
 
24.
 
Burdon went on to front the African American en-
semble War in the late 1960s, an association that lasted through the release of the painfully titled LP Black Man’s Burdon. The group then left Burdon, going on to record fifteen hit albums of its own.
 
25.
 
Devin McKinney, Magic Circles: The Beatles in 
Dream and History (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003), 33.
 
26.
 
Keith Richards with James Fox, Life  (New York: 
Little, Brown and Company, 2010), 103.
 
27.
 
Robert Christgau, “The Rolling Stones,” in The 
Rolling Stone Illustrated History, 243.
 
28.
 
Anthony Scaduto, Bob Dylan (New York: Signet 
Books, 1973), 203–204.
 
29.
 
Although it is not hard to imagine that they took 
this occasion to toke up, it seems quite unlikely that they had not encountered the mind-altering substance 
in Hamburg, where they flirted with the German art school scene through the influence of Stuart Sutcliffe’s 
girlfriend Astrid Kirchherr. 
 
30.
 
Scaduto, Bob Dylan, 204.
 
31.
 
Ibid.
 
32.
 
Lillian Roxon, Lillian Roxon’s Rock Encyclopedia  
(New York: Grosset and Dunlap. 1971), 78.
 
33.
 
Ibid., 187.
 
34.
 
After Vietnam, Sadler worked as a mercenary, hir-
ing himself out in more than half a dozen battles around 
the world. In September 1988, he took a bullet in the head in Guatemala City.
 
35.
 
Todd Gitlin, The Sixties: Years of Hope, Days of 
Rage (New York: Bantam Books, 1993).
 
36.
 
George, The Death of Rhythm & Blues, 86.
 
37.
 
Rob Bowman, “The Stax Sound: A Musicological 
Analysis,” Popular Music (Vol. 14, No. 3, 1995), 316–317.
 
38.
 
Jim Delahunt, “Whatever Success I Had Was 
through the Help of the Good Lord,” Rolling Stone, 20 
January 1968, 13.
 
39.
 
Peter Guralnick, Sweet Soul Music: Rhythm and 
Blues and the Southern Dream of Freedom (New York: Harper and Row, 1986), 169.
 
40.
 
Ibid., 332.
 
41.
 
Hettie Jones, Big Star, Fallin’ Mama (New York: 
Viking Press, 1974), 41. The term Rap in Jones’s quote refers to H. Rap Brown, the militant black leader whose poetic, fiery speeches may well have been one of rap mu-sic’s formative influences.
 
42.
 
James Brown with Bruce Tucker, James Brown: The 
Godfather of Soul (London: Fontana Books, 1988), 138.
 
43.
 
Robert Palmer, “James Brown,” in The Rolling 
Stone Illustrated History, 168.
 
44.
 
For a more developed discussion of this compari -
son, see Deborah Pacini Hernandez, Oye Como V a!: Hy-bridity and Identity in Latino Popular Music (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2010).
 
45.
 
Cited in Juan Flores, From Bomba to Hip-Hop: 
Puerto Rican Culture and Latino Identity (New York: Co-lumbia University Press, 2000), 82.
 
46.
 
John Storm Roberts, The Latin Tinge: The Impact 
of Latin American Music on the United States (Tivoli, NY: Original Music, 1979), 167.
 
47.
 
Flores, From Bomba to Hip-Hop, 89.
 
48.
 
Pacini Hernandez, Oye Como V a, 47–48.
 
49.
 
Nick Bromell, Tomorrow Never Knows: Rock and 
Psychedelics in the 1960s (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000), 72.
 
50.
 
Chris Welch, “Magnificent Seven,” Melody Maker, 9 
September 1967, 8. Also see Steve Waksman, “The Turn 476  ROCKIN ’ OUTto Noise: Rock Guitar from the 1950s to the 1970s,” in 
The Cambridge Companion to the Guitar, ed. Victor Coelho (Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 114–115.
 
51.
 
Ellen Willis, “Janis Joplin,” in The Rolling Stone Il -
lustrated History, 384.
 
52.
 
For the most detailed account of the formative 
years of the Dead and its members, see Dennis McNally, 
A Long Strange Trip: The Inside History of the Grateful Dead (New York: Broadway Books, 2002).
 
53.
 
Roxon, Lillian Roxon’s Rock Encyclopedia, 210.
 
54.
 
Ian MacDonald, Revolution in the Head: The Beatles’ 
Records and the Sixties, 3d ed. (Chicago: Chicago Review Press, 2007), 190.
 
55.
 
Marcus, “The Beatles,” 216.
 
56.
 
Charles Shaar Murray, Crosstown Traffic: Jimi Hen-
drix and the Rock ‘n’ Roll Revolution (New York: St. Mar-
tin’s Press, 1989), 91.
 
57.
 
David Crosby, The Monterey International Pop Festi-
val, boxed set, Rhino R2 70596.
 
58.
 
Crosby sat in for Neil Young, who had only a week 
earlier left Buffalo Springfield and so did not appear at Monterey, although he would later join musical forces with Stills and Crosby. See Harvey Kubernik and Ken-
neth Kubernik, A Perfect Haze: The Illustrated History of 
the Monterey Pop Festival (Solana Beach, CA: Santa Mon-ica Press, 2011), 168.
 
59.
 
Steve Waksman, Instruments of Desire: The Electric 
Guitar and the Shaping of Musical Experience (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999), 207–236.
 
60.
 
George, The Death of Rhythm & Blues, 98.
 
61.
 
Gitlin, The Sixties, 287.
 
62.
 
Joel Makower, Woodstock: The Oral History (New 
York: Doubleday, 1989), 179–181; Michael Lang with Holly George-Warren, The Road to Woodstock (New 
York: Ecco, 2009), 175–176.
 
63.
 
Woodstock , film directed by Michael Wadleigh, 
1970.
 
64.
 
Murray, Crosstown Traffic, 24.
 
65.
 
Stanley Booth, The True Adventures of the Rolling 
Stones (New York: Vintage Books, 1985), 501.
 
66.
 
Gimme Shelter, film directed by David Maysles, Al-
bert Maysles, and Charlotte Zwerin, 1970.
chapter 7
 1.  Michael Lydon, “Rock for Sale,” in The Age of Rock 
2: Sights and Sounds of the American Cultural Revolution, 
ed. Jonathan Eisen (New York: Vintage Books, 1970), 53. 
2.
 
Steve Pond, “The Seventies,” Rolling Stone, 20 Sep-
tember 1990, 53.
 
3.
 
For a detailed discussion of the merger movement, 
see Steve Chapple and Reebee Garofalo, Rock ‘n’ Roll Is 
Here to Pay: The History and Politics of the Music Industry  
(Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1977), 82–87.
 
4.
 
Peter Wicke, Rock Music: Culture, Aesthetics and So-
ciology (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 121.
 
5.
 
Ben Fong-Torres, ed., The Rolling Stone Interviews, 
vol. 2 (New York: Warner Books, 1973), 292.
 
6.
 
Wicke, Rock Music, 126.
 
7.
 
Chapple and Garofalo, Rock ‘n’ Roll Is Here to Pay, 
175.
 
8.
 
Thomas Frank, The Conquest of Cool: Business Cul-
ture, Counterculture, and the Rise of Hip Consumerism (Chi-cago: University of Chicago Press, 1997), 26.
 
9.
 
Chapple and Garofalo, Rock ‘n’ Roll Is Here to Pay, 109
 
10.
 
Ibid., 121.
 
11.
 
Kim Simpson, Early ’70s Radio: The American For -
mat Revolution (New York: Continuum, 2011), 120–124.
 
12.
 
Robert Draper, Rolling Stone Magazine (New York: 
Harper and Row, 1990).
 
13.
 
Jann Wenner, “ A Letter from the Editor,” Rolling 
Stone, 9 November 1967, 2.
 
14.
 
Michael Lydon, “The High Cost of Music and 
Love: Where’s the Money from Monterey?” Rolling Stone, 9 November 1967, 1.
 
15.
 
Jann Wenner, “Musicians Reject New Political Ex-
ploiters,” Rolling Stone, 11 May 1968, 1, 22.
 
16.
 
Draper, Rolling Stone Magazine, 157.
 
17.
 
Jann Wenner, “ A Letter from the Editor: On the 
Occasion of Our Fourth Anniversary Issue,” Rolling Stone, 11 November 1971, 34.
 
18.
 
The Compleat Beatles, video documentary, produced 
by Patrick Montgomery, 1982.
 
19.
 
Ibid.
 
20.
 
Joe Smith, Off the Record: An Oral History of Popular 
Music (New York: Warner Books, 1988), 242.
 
21.
 
Simon Frith, Sound Effects: Youth Leisure and the 
Politics of Rock ‘n’ Roll (New York: Pantheon, 1981), 53.
 
22.
 
Bernard Gendron, Between Montmartre and the 
Mudd Club: Popular Music and the Avant-Garde (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2002), 213.
 
23.
 
Ralph Gleason, “Perspectives: Changing with the 
Money Changers,” Rolling Stone, 20 January 1968, 9.
 
24.
 
Ralph Gleason, “Stop This Shuck Mike Bloom-
field,” Rolling Stone, 11 May 1968, 10. NOTES 477 25.  John Pidgeon, Eric Clapton (London: Panther, 
1976), 65.
 
26.
 
Dave Morse, Motown (London: Vista, 1971), 108.
 
27.
 
Jon Landau, “Soul,” Rolling Stone, 24 February 
1968, 18.
 
28.
 
This list is drawn from Wicke, Rock Music, 95.
 
29.
 
Simon Frith and Howard Horne, Art into Pop (New 
York: Methuen, 1987), 86.
 
30.
 
Dave Marsh, Before I Get Old: The Story of the Who  
(New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1983), 125.
 
31.
 
Frith and Horne, Art into Pop, 109.
 
32.
 
Ibid., 108.
 
33.
 
Iain Chambers, Urban Rhythms: Pop Music and Pop-
ular Culture (New York: Macmillan, 1985), 114–115.
 
34.
 
Robert Walser, Running with the Devil: Power, Gen-
der, and Madness in Heavy Metal Music (Hanover, NH: 
Wesleyan University Press, 1993), 61–62.
 
35.
 
Edward Macan, Rocking the Classics: English Pro-
gressive Rock and the Counterculture (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997), 13.
 
36.
 
On Emerson and the Moog, see Trevor Pinch and 
Frank Trocco, Analog Days: The Invention and Impact of the Moog Synthesizer (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-sity Press, 2002), 200–213.
 
37.
 
Frith and Horne, Art into Pop, 98.
 
38.
 
Rolling Stone, 28 May 1970, 17.
 
39.
 
For more on the growth of jazz-rock “fusion,” see 
Steve Pond, Head Hunters: The Making of Jazz’s First Platinum Album (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michi-gan Press, 2005); Kevin Fellezs, Birds of Fire: Jazz, Rock, 
Funk, and the Creation of Fusion (Durham, NC: Duke Uni-versity Press, 2011).
 
40.
 
Chambers, Urban Rhythms, 118.
 
41.
 
“Wexler Attributes Greater R&B Volume to Black 
Buyer,” Billboard, 20 November 1971, 8.
 
42.
 
Paul Ackerman, “Gortikov Scorches Whitey Trade 
in NATRA Speech,” Billboard, 17 July 1969, 1.
 
43.
 
“New Black Hope,” Billboard, 17 May 1969, 34.
 
44.
 
John Lombardi, “Kenny Gamble and Leon Huff 
and the Resurrection of Jerry Butler and Philly Soul,” Rolling Stone, 30 April 1970, 39.
 
45.
 
Nelson George, The Death of Rhythm & Blues (New 
York: Pantheon Books, 1988), 145.
 
46.
 
Jim Miller, “The Sound of Philadelphia,” in The 
Rolling Stone Illustrated History of Rock & Roll, ed. An -
thony DeCurtis and James Henke (New York: Random House, 1992), 518.
 
47.
 
Of course, not all veteran r&b groups were this 
lucky. The Dells, the model for Robert Townshend’s film The Five Heartbeats, had been together since 1953. The 
group’s biggest success, “Oh, What a Night” (1969), was a remake of an r&b hit the group had recorded thirteen years earlier. The Dells’ last Top Forty hit was in 1973.
 
48.
 
“Wexler Attributes Greater R&B Volume to Black 
Buyer,” 8.
 
49.
 
Alice Echols, Hot Stuff: Disco and the Remaking of 
American Culture (New York: W .W . Norton & Company, 
2010), 35.
 
50.
 
Peter Guralnick, Sweet Soul Music (New York: 
Harper and Row, 1986), 391.
 
51.
 
Patricia Kenneally-Morrison, “Rock Around the 
Cock,” in Rock She Wrote: Women Write About Rock, Pop, and Rap, ed. Evelyn McDonnell and Ann Powers (New 
York: Delta, 1995), 363.
 
52.
 
Robert Christgau, Any Old Way You Choose It: Rock 
and Other Pop Music, 1967–1973 (Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1973), 217
 
53.
 
Lester Bangs, “James Taylor Marked for Death,” in 
Psychotic Reactions and Carburetor Dung, ed. Greil Marcus (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1987), 71–72.
 
54.
 
Chapple and Garofalo, Rock ‘n’ Roll Is Here to Pay, 
80.
 
55.
 
Katherine Orloff, Rock ‘n’ Roll Woman (Los Ange-
les: Nash Publishing, 1974), 11.
 
56.
 
Gillian G. Gaar, She’s a Rebel: The History of Women 
in Rock & Roll (Seattle: Seal Press, 1992), 123.
 
57.
 
Christgau, Any Old Way You Choose It, 212.
 
58.
 
Stephen Holden, “The Evolution of the Singer-
Songwriter,” in The Rolling Stone Illustrated History of Rock & Roll, ed. Anthony DeCurtis and James Henke (New York: Random House, 1992), 489.
 
59.
 
Bruce Springsteen can be classified as a singer/
songwriter in the same sense that Van Morrison or the solo John Lennon can be; they all composed personal, poetic verse. They also belted it out with incredible in-tensity; they were hardly soft. Following the breakup of Them, Morrison tasted success on his first solo al-bum, Blowin’ Your Mind (1967), which had the hit single 
“Brown Eyed Girl.” After a dry spell that included the failure of the critically acclaimedAstral Weeks, he regained his footing in 1970 with Moondance and His Band and the Street Choir. The latter of these yielded the single “Domino,” which made the Top Ten. At his most con-fessional, Lennon transformed months of primal scream therapy into singles like “Cold Turkey” and album cuts like “Mother,” from his first solo LP , John Lennon/Plas-tic Ono Band (1970), the album that included “Working Class Hero.” Springsteen was that working-class hero.
 
60.
 
Jon Landau, “Growing Young with Rock and Roll,” 
The Real Paper, 22 May 1974, 23.478  ROCKIN ’ OUT 61.  Robin Denselow, When the Music’s Over: The Story 
of Political Pop (Boston: Faber and Faber, 1989), 180.
 
62.
 
Ellen Willis, “Beginning to See the Light: Or Rock 
& Roll, Feminism, and Night Blindness,” Village Voice, 27 
March 1978, 21–22.
 
63.
 
Christgau, Any Old Way You Choose It, 274.
 
64.
 
Gaar, She’s a Rebel, 136.
 
65.
 
For more on the Runaways, see Steve Waksman, 
This Ain’t the Summer of Love: Conflict and Crossover in 
Heavy Metal and Punk (Berkeley, CA: University of Cali-fornia Press, 2009), 127–144.
 
66.
 
Bonnie Morris, Eden Built by Eves: The Culture of 
Women’s Music Festivals (Los Angeles: Alyson Books, 1999).
 
67.
 
Cynthia M. Lont, “Women’s Music: No Longer a 
Small Private Party,” in Rockin’ the Boat: Mass Music and 
Mass Movements, ed. Reebee Garofalo (Boston: South 
End Press, 1992), 242.
 
68.
 
On cultural feminism and its relationship to the 
broader feminist movement, see Alice Echols, Daring to Be Bad: Radical Feminism in America, 1967–1975 (Minne-apolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1989), espe-cially 243–286.
 
69.
 
Gaar, She’s a Rebel, 155–156.
 
70.
 
Bill C. Malone, Country Music, USA (Austin: Uni-
versity of Texas Press, 1985), 386.
 
71.
 
Stambler, Encyclopedia of Pop, Rock & Soul, 37.
 
72.
 
By the time he died from heart failure in the mid-
1970s, Parsons was credited with influencing everyone from Emmylou Harris (his protégée) to the Rolling Stones.
 
73.
 
Barney Hoskyns, Waiting for the Sun: Strange Days, 
Weird Scenes and the Sound of Los Angeles (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1996), 226.
 
74.
 
Christgau, Any Old Way You Choose It, 269.
 
75.
 
Anthony DeCurtis, “The Eagles,” Rolling Stone, 20 
September 1990, 92.
 
76.
 
Malone, Country Music, USA, 404–405.
 
77.
 
Deena Weinstein, Heavy Metal: A Cultural Sociology 
(New York: Lexington Books, 1991), 23.
 
78.
 
Walser, Running with the Devil, 2.
 
79.
 
Weinstein, Heavy Metal, 16.
 
80.
 
Walser, Running with the Devil, 57–107.
 
81.
 
Ibid., 10.
 
82.
 
Stambler, Encyclopedia of Pop, Rock & Soul, 57.
 
83.
 
Steve Waksman, Instruments of Desire: The Electric 
Guitar and the Shaping of Musical Experience (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999), 248–252; Susan Fast, In the Houses of the Holy: Led Zeppelin and the Power 
of Rock Music (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2001), 196–198. 84.  Waksman, Instruments of Desire, 257–260. 
 
85.
 
Walser, Running with the Devil, 61, citing Morde-
chai, “Where There’s Smoke . . . There’s Fire,” Guitar 
World, February 1991, 62.
 
86.
 
Waksman, This Ain’t the Summer of Love, 32–50.
 
87.
 
Walser, Running with the Devil, 68.
 
88.
 
J. D. Considine, “Led Zeppelin,” Rolling Stone, 20 
September 1990, 59, 109.
 
89.
 
Waksman, This Ain’t the Summer of Love, 146–171, 
295–297.
 
90.
 
Smith, Off the Record, 273.
 
91.
 
Robert Duncan, The Noise: Notes from a Rock ‘n’ 
Roll Era (New York: Ticknor & Fields, 1984), 91–92; 
Waksman, This Ain’t the Summer of Love, 82–87.
 
92.
 
Chambers, Urban Rhythms, 113.
 
93.
 
Philip Auslander, Performing Glam Rock: Gender 
and Theatricality in Popular Music  (Ann Arbor, MI: Uni-
versity of Michigan Press, 2006), 106.
 
94.
 
Frith and Horne, Art into Pop, 115
 
95.
 
Chambers, Urban Rhythms, 133.
 
96.
 
Peter York, Style Wars (London: Sidgwick  
and Jackson, 1980). Cited in Chambers, Urban Rhythms, 138.
chapter 8
 1.  Charles M. Young, “Rock Is Sick and Living in 
London: A Report on the Sex Pistols,” Rolling Stone, 20 
October 1977, 68.
 
2.
 
Mikal Gilmore, “Disco,” Rolling Stone , 19 April 
1979, 54.
 
3.
 
Robert Christgau, “ A Cult Explodes—and a Move-
ment Is Born,” Village Voice, 24 October 1977, 57.
 
4.
 
Andrew Kopkind, “The Dialectic of Disco,” Village 
Voice, 12 February 1979, 11.
 
5.
 
Simon Frith, “Beyond the Dole Queue: The Poli-
tics of Punk,” Village Voice, 24 October 1977, 78.
 
6.
 
Ibid.
 
7.
 
Kopkind, “The Dialectic of Disco,” 11.
 
8.
 
Gilmore, “Disco,” 54. It should also be noted that a 
good deal of the anti-disco sentiment had to do with the fear of and hostility toward technology replacing live music.
 
9.
 
Young, “Rock Is Sick and Living in London,” 70.
 
10.
 
Jon Savage, England’s Dreaming: Anarchy, Sex Pis-
tols, Punk Rock, and Beyond (New York: St Martins Press, 1992), 87. NOTES 479 11.  Clinton Heylin, From the Velvets to the Voidoids: A 
Pre-Punk History for a Post-Punk World (New York: Pen-
guin Books, 1993), 87–88.
 
12.
 
On the founding of the Stooges, see Paul Trynka, 
Iggy Pop: Open Up and Bleed (New York: Broadway 
Books, 2007), 58–64.
 
13.
 
Heylin, From the Velvets to the Voidoids, 38.
 
14.
 
Lester Bangs, “Of Pop and Pies and Fun: A Program 
for Mass Liberation in the Form of a Stooges Review, or, Who’s the Fool?” in Psychotic Reactions and Carburetor Dung, ed. Greil Marcus (New York: Knopf, 1987), 38.
 
15.
 
On the advent of this earlier manifestation of 
punk, see Bernard Gendron, Between Montmartre and the Mudd Club: Popular Music and the Avant-Garde (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2002), 227–247, and Steve Waksman, This Ain’t the Summer of Love: Conflict and 
Crossover in Heavy Metal and Punk (Berkeley, CA: Univer-sity of California Press, 2009), 50–66.
 
16.
 
Heylin, From the Velvets to the Voidoids, 123.
 
17.
 
Smith recounts the story of her relationship with 
Mapplethorpe in Just Kids (New York: Ecco, 2010).
 
18.
 
Heylin, From the Velvets to the Voidoids, 172.
 
19.
 
Ibid., 174.
 
20.
 
Legs McNeil and Gillian McCain, Please Kill Me: 
The Uncensored Oral History of Punk (New York: Penguin, 1996), 202.
 
21.
 
Savage, England’s Dreaming, 202.
 
22.
 
Ibid. 330.
 
23.
 
Dick Hebdige, Subculture: The Meaning of Style  
(London: Routledge, 1979),116–117.
 
24.
 
Christgau, “ A Cult Explodes,” 70.
 
25.
 
Ibid.
 
26.
 
Lester Bangs, “The White Noise Supremacists,” 
Village Voice, 30 April 1979, 45–46.
 
27.
 
Ibid., 46.
 
28.
 
Ibid., 45.
 
29.
 
Savage, England’s Dreaming, 242.
 
30.
 
David Widgery, Beating Time: Riot ‘n’ Race ‘n’ Rock 
‘n’ Roll (London: Chatto and Windus, 1986), 53.
 
31.
 
Savage, England’s Dreaming, 398.
 
32.
 
Widgery, Beating Time, 64.
 
33.
 
Savage, England’s Dreaming, 442.
 
34.
 
Theo Cateforis, Are We Not New Wave? Modern Pop 
at the Turn of the 1980s (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 2011), 25–27; Gendron, Between Mont-martre and the Mudd Club, 269–273.
 
35.
 
Gillian G. Gaar, She’s a Rebel: The History of Women 
in Rock & Roll (Seattle: Seal Press, 1992), 277.  36.  Michael Azerrad, Our Band Could Be Your Life: 
Scenes from the American Indie Underground (Boston: Lit -
tle, Brown and Company, 2001), 43–44; Waksman, This 
Ain’t the Summer of Love, 284–287.
 
37.
 
Robert Palmer, “New Rock from the Suburbs,” 
New York Times, 23 September 1984, 23.
 
38.
 
Steven Blush, American Hardcore: A Tribal History, 
2d ed. (Los Angeles: Feral House, 2010), 28–31.
 
39.
 
Heylin, From the Velvets to the Voidoids, 314.
 
40.
 
Stephen Holden, “The Evolution of a Dance 
Craze,” Rolling Stone, 19 April 1979, 29.
 
41.
 
Tom Smucker, “Disco,” in The Rolling Stone Illus-
trated History of Rock & Roll, ed. Jim Miller, Anthony 
DeCurtis, James Henke, and Holly George-Warren (New York: Random House, 1992), 562.
 
42.
 
Ibid.
 
43.
 
Barbara Graustark, “Disco Takes Over,” News-
week, 2 April 1979, 59.
 
44.
 
Ibid., 58–59.
 
45.
 
Kopkind, “The Dialectic of Disco,” 14.
 
46.
 
Rickey Vincent, Funk: The Music, The People, and 
the Rhythm of the One (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1996), 232.
 
47.
 
Anne Danielsen, Presence and Pleasure: The Funk 
Grooves of James Brown and Parliament (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2006), 73, 121.
 
48.
 
Vince Aletti, “The Loft,” in The Disco Files, 1973–
1978: New York’s Underground, Week by Week  (London: 
DJhistory.com, 2009), 14–19; Tim Lawrence, Love Saves the Day: A History of American Dance Music Culture (Dur-ham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003), 22–27.
 
49.
 
Kopkind, “The Dialectic of Disco,” 11.
 
50.
 
Holden, “The Evolution of a Dance Craze,” 30.
 
51.
 
Deborah Pacini Hernandez, Oye Como V a! Hybridity 
and Identity in Latino Popular Music  (Philadelphia: Tem-
ple University Press, 2010), 58–59.
 
52.
 
Lawrence, Love Saves the Day, 170.
 
53.
 
Peter Shapiro, Turn the Beat Around: The Secret His-
tory of Disco (New York: Faber and Faber, 2005), 108.
 
54.
 
Kopkind, “The Dialectic of Disco,” 16.
 
55.
 
Russell Sanjek, American Popular Music and Its 
Business: The First Four Hundred Years, Volume III (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988), 514.
 
56.
 
David Ansen, “Rock Tycoon,” Newsweek, 31 July 
1978, 41.
 
57.
 
Ibid., 41.
 
58.
 
Alice Echols, Hot Stuff: Disco and the Remaking of 
American Culture (New York: W .W . Norton and Company, 
2010), 189.480  ROCKIN ’ OUT 59.  Don McLeese, “ Anatomy of an Anti-Disco Riot,” 
In These Times, 29 August–4 September 1979, 23.
 
60.
 
Lawrence, Love Saves the Day, 326–327.
 
61.
 
Graustark, “Disco Takes Over,” 58.
 
62.
 
Dave Marsh, “The Flip Sides of 1979,” Rolling 
Stone, 27 December 1979, 28.
 
63.
 
Georgia Christgau, “Disco! Disco! Disco! Four 
Critics Address the Musical Question,” In These Times, 
6–12 June 1979, 21.
 
64.
 
McLeese, “ Anatomy of an Anti-Disco Riot,” 23.
 
65.
 
Robert Hilburn, “Musical Lessons from 1983’s 
First Half,” Cape Cod Times, 16 July 1983, 12.
 
66.
 
N. R. Kleinfeld, “FM’s Success Is Loud and Clear,” 
New York Times, 26 October 1979, D-l.
 
67.
 
Marsh, “The Flip Sides of 1979,” 30.
 
68.
 
Pablo Guzman, “On the Radio, Part Two,” Rock & 
Roll Confidential, January 1984, 2.
chapter 9
 1.  Recording Industry Association of America 
(RIAA), Inside the Recording Industry: A Statistical Over -
view, Update ’86 (New York: Recording Industry Asso -
ciation of America, 1986), 4.
 
2.
 
Michèle Hung and Esteban Garcia Morencos, 
World Record Sales 1969–1990: A Statistical History of the World Recording Industry  (London: International Federa-
tion of the Phonogram Industry, 1990), 85.
 
3.
 
Paul Grein, “Unemployment Lines: LA Industrial 
Personnel Face Major Challenges to Rebuild Their Ca-reers,” Billboard, 19 May 1979, 3.
 
4.
 
Simon Frith, “Picking Up the Pieces: Video Pop,” 
in Facing the Music, ed. Simon Frith (New York: Pan-
theon Books, 1988), 93.
 
5.
 
“Record Business Sees Light Ahead—On Video 
Screen,” Chicago Tribune, 26 April 1983, 5.
 
6.
 
RIAA, Inside the Recording Industry, 5.
 
7.
 
Russell Sanjek, American Popular Music and Its 
Business: The First Four Hundred Years, Volume III (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1988), 602.
 
8.
 
Frith, “Picking Up the Pieces,” 117.
 
9.
 
Sanjek, American Popular Music and Its Business, 
641.
 
10.
 
Synesthesia refers to the blurring of the senses, 
such that one cannot separate what one sees from what one hears or smells or tastes. Andrew Goodwin dis-cusses the “synesthetic” qualities of music video in Dancing in the Distraction Factory: Music Television and Popular Culture (Minneapolis, MN: University of Min-nesota Press, 1992), 50. For more on the aesthetics of music video, see Carol Vernallis,Experiencing Music Video: Aesthetics and Cultural Context (New York: Columbia Uni-versity Press, 2004).
 
11.
 
Goodwin, Dancing in the Distraction Factory, 133.
 
12.
 
Eric Gelman, “Rocking Video,” Newsweek, 18 April 
1983, 98.
 
13.
 
Goodwin, Dancing in the Distraction Factory, 
132–139.
 
14.
 
Ibid., 134.
 
15.
 
Ibid.
 
16.
 
Simon Reynolds, Rip It Up and Start Again: Postpunk 
1978–1984 (New York: Penguin, 2005), 296–314.
 
17.
 
Ibid., 340.
 
18.
 
Parke Peterbaugh, “ Anglomania: America Surren-
ders to the Brits—But Who Really Wins?” Billboard, 10 
November 1983, 31.
 
19.
 
Rock and Roll Confidential, July 1983, 6.
 
20.
 
Rebecca Bricker, “Take One,” People, 4 April  
1983, 31.
  21.  Steven Levy, “ Ad Nauseum: How MTV Sells Out 
Rock & Roll,” Rolling Stone, 8 December 1983, 37.
 
22.
 
Bricker, “Take One,” 31.
 
23.
 
Margo Jefferson, On Michael Jackson (New York: 
Pantheon, 2006), 87.
 
24.
 
Michael Shore, The Rolling Stone Book of Rock Video 
(London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1985), 86.
 
25.
 
See, for example, E. Ann Kaplan, Rocking Around 
the Clock: Music Television, Postmodernism, and Consumer Culture  (New York: Routledge, 1987); L. Lewis, Gender 
Politics and MTV: Voicing the Difference (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1990); and Susan McClary, Feminine Endings: Music, Gender, and Sexuality (Minne-
apolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1991).
 
26.
 
Gelman, “Rocking Video,” 97.
 
27.
 
Steve Morse, “Can American Bands Beat the Brit-
ish Blitz?” Boston Globe, 1 January 1984, A-4.
 
28.
 
Paul Grein, “ AOR Programmers Plan More Vari-
ety,” Billboard, 14 January 1984, 66.
 
29.
 
Laurence Kenneth Shore, “The Crossroads of 
Business and Music: A Study of the Music Industry in the United States and Internationally” (Ph.D. diss., Stan-ford University, 1983), 248; Hung and Morencos, World Record Sales, 1969–1990, 85.
 
30.
 
Paul Grein, “’83 RIAA Tally: Fewer Biggies,” Bill-
board, 14 January 1984, 4.
 
31.
 
Jeffrey Zaslow, “Music and Money,” Wall Street 
Journal, 21 May 1985, 1. NOTES 481 32.  Charles Shaar Murray, Crosstown Traffic: Jimi Hen-
drix and the Rock ‘n’ Roll Revolution (New York: St. Mar-
tin’s Press, 1989), 102.
 
33.
 
Paris Is Burning, film directed by Jenny Livingston, 
1990, documents the gay drag ball scene out of which 
voguing emerged, and profiles Ninja in considerable de-
tail as an innovator within the style.
 
34.
 
Ted Fox, In the Groove (New York: St. Martin’s 
Press, 1986), 322.
 
35.
 
Jeff Smith, The Sounds of Commerce: Marketing Pop-
ular Film Music (New York: Columbia University Press, 1998), 155.
 
36.
 
Stephen Holden, “Musical Odyssey,” New York 
Times, 9 December 1987, C-33.
 
37.
 
Frith, “Picking Up the Pieces,” 102–103.
 
38.
 
Paul Grein, “Charts ’86,” Billboard, 27 December 
1986, Y-4.
 
39.
 
Steve Gett, “Rock ’86,” Billboard, 27 December 
1986, Y-4.
 
40.
 
Frith, “Picking Up the Pieces,” 90.
 
41.
 
John Rockwell, “Leftist Causes? Rock Seconds 
Those Emotions,” New York Times, 11 December 1988, 23.
 
42.
 
David Breskin, “Bob Geldof: The Rolling Stone 
Interview,” Rolling Stone, 5 December 1985, 34.
 
43.
 
Mark Coleman, “The Revival of Conscience,” Roll-
ing Stone, 15 November 1990, 71.
 
44.
 
Griel Marcus, “Rock for Ethiopia” (panel presen-
tation at the Third International Conference on Popular 
Music Studies, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, July 1985), 17.
 
45.
 
Pete Hamill, “ A Day to Remember,” Rolling Stone, 
29 August 1985, 28.
 
46.
 
Marley Brant, Join Together: Forty Years of the 
Rock Music Festival (New York: Backbeat Books, 2008), 156–168.
 
47.
 
Hamill, “ A Day to Remember,” 74.
 
48.
 
Will Straw, “Rock for Ethiopia” (panel presentation 
at the Third International Conference on Popular Music Studies, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, July 1985), 28.
 
49.
 
Breskin, “Bob Geldof: The Rolling Stone Inter -
view,” 28.
 
50.
 
Simon Frith, “Crappy Birthday to Punk,” In These 
Times, 23–29 April 1986, 20.
 
51.
 
Rock & Roll Confidential, 1985 September, 1.
 
52.
 
Stan Rijven, “Rock for Ethiopia” (panel presentation 
at the Third International Conference on Popular Music Studies, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, July 1985), 3–7.
 
53.
 
Jack Healy, “Mass Concerts/Mass Consciousness: 
The Politics of Mega-Events” (panel discussion at the 
New Music Seminar, New York, 17 July 1989). 54.  Coleman, “The Revival of Conscience,” 80. 
 
55.
 
The bill included Whitney Houston, Sting, Stevie 
Wonder, Dire Straits, Tracy Chapman, Peter Gabriel, 
the Fat Boys, Jackson Browne, Natalie Cole, Little Ste-
ven, Eurythmics, Freddie Jackson, Phil Collins, UB40, Al Green, Midge Ure, Miriam Makeba, Hugh Masakela, Simple Minds, Sly and Robbie, Aswad, the Bee Gees, Youssou N’Dour, Salt-n-Pepa, and more.
 
56.
 
Anthony DeCurtis, “Rock & Roll Politics: Did the 
Nelson Mandela Tribute Make Its Point,” Rolling Stone , 
11 August 1988, 34.
 
57.
 
Danny Schechter, “Why We Didn’t See Wembley,” 
Africa Report (July–August 1990), 66.
 
58.
 
Rock & Roll Confidential, September 1985, p. 1.
 
59.
 
Simon Frith and John Street, “Party Music,” 
Marxism Today (June 1986), 29.
 
60.
 
The Making of Sun City, MTV documentary pro-
duced by Steve Lawrence and Vinny Longabardo, Karl-
Lorimar Home Video, 1985.
 
61.
 
Steven Feld, “Notes on World Beat,” Public Culture 
Bulletin (Fall 1988), 33–34.
 
62.
 
Ibid., 32.
 
63.
 
George Lipsitz, Dangerous Crossroads: Popular Mu -
sic, Postmodernism and the Poetics of Place (London: Verso, 1994), 60.
 
64.
 
Our understanding of Live 8 has been aided by C. 
Michael Elavsky, “United as ONE: Live 8 and the Poli-tics of the Global Music Media Spectacle,” Journal of Popular Music Studies (December 2009), 384–410.
chapter 10
 1.  Art Thompson, Stompboxes: A History of Guitar 
Fuzzes, Flangers, Phasers, Echoes & Wahs (San Fran-
cisco: Miller Freeman Books, 1997).
 
2.
 
Tricia Rose, Black Noise: Rap Music and Black Cul-
ture in Contemporary America (Hanover, NH: University 
Press of New England, 1994).
 
3.
 
Richard Smith, “Will Heavy Metal Survive the 
Seventies?,” Circus, 11 May 1978, 27–30.
 
4.
 
Rick Johnson, “Is Heavy Metal Dead? Last Drum 
Solo at the Power Chord Corral,” Creem , October 1980, 
42–46.
 
5.
 
On Motörhead as prototypical metal/punk cross-
over band, see Steve Waksman, This Ain’t the Sum-mer of Love: Conflict and Crossover in Heavy Metal and 
Punk (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2009), 146–171.
 
6.
 
Ibid., 203–204.482  ROCKIN ’ OUT 7.  Philip Bashe, Heavy Metal Thunder: The Music, Its 
History, Its Heroes (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1985); 
Deena Weinstein, Heavy Metal: A Cultural Sociology (New York: Lexington Books, 1991).
 
8.
 
Weinstein, Heavy Metal, 44.
 
9.
 
Robert Walser, Running with the Devil: Power, Gen-
der, and Madness in Heavy Metal Music (Hanover, NH: 
Wesleyan University Press, 1993), 12.
 
10.
 
Waksman, This Ain’t the Summer of Love, 262.
 
11.
 
Walser, Running with the Devil, 76.
 
12.
 
Mötley Crüe with Neil Strauss, The Dirt: Confes-
sions of the World’s Most Notorious Band (New York: Re-gan Books, 2002), 90.
 
13.
 
Andrew Goodwin, Dancing in the Distraction Fac-
tory: Music Television and Popular Culture (Minneapolis, 
MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1992), 135.
 
14.
 
Ibid., 135.
 
15.
 
Greg Ptacek, “Majors Return to Nuts and Bolts 
of Pre-MTV Metal Marketing Days,” Billboard, 27 April 1985, HM 15.
 
16.
 
Linda Martin and Kerry Segrave, Anti-Rock: The 
Opposition to Rock ‘n’ Roll (New York: DaCapo Press, 1993), 232.
 
17.
 
Ptacek, “Majors Return to Nuts and Bolts,” HM 3.
 
18.
 
Ibid., HM 15.
 
19.
 
Goodwin, Dancing in the Distraction Factory, 136.
 
20.
 
E. Ann Kaplan, Rocking Around the Clock: Music 
Television, Postmodernism, and Consumer Culture (New York: Routledge, 1987), 102–103.
 
21.
 
Roberta Smoodin, “Crazy Like David Lee Roth,” 
Playgirl, August 1986, 43, quoted in Walser, Running with the Devil, 129.
 
22.
 
Walser, Running with the Devil, 111.
 
23.
 
Ibid., 121.
 
24.
 
Weinstein, Heavy Metal, 48.
 
25.
 
Waksman, This Ain’t the Summer of Love, 229–240.
 
26.
 
Metal scholar Glenn Pillsbury discusses the “Fade 
to Black Paradigm” established by the song of the same name as a key strategy through which Metallica ex -
panded its audience beyond the speed/thrash metal sub-culture. See Pillsbury, Damage Incorporated: Metallica and the Production of Identity (New York: Routledge, 2006), 33–56.
 
27.
 
Ibid., 147.
 
28.
 
Paul Grein, “The Year in Charts,” Billboard, 26 De-
cember 1987, Y-4.
 
29.
 
J. D. Considine, “Metal Mania,” Rolling Stone, 15 
November 1990, 104.  30.  See Weinstein, Heavy Metal, 66; Walser, Running 
with the Devil, 17.
 
31.
 
Walser, Running with the Devil, 17.
 
32.
 
Laurel Fishman, “Lita Ford,” Metal, May 1988, 
quoted in Walser, Running with the Devil, 132.
 
33.
 
On black metal, death metal, and the larger sphere 
of extreme metal as it evolved from the late 1980s for-
ward, see Keith Kahn-Harris, Extreme Metal: Music and Culture on the Edge (Oxford, UK: Berg, 2007); Albert Mudrian, Choosing Death: The Improbable History of Death 
Metal and Grindcore (Los Angeles: Feral House, 2004).
 
34.
 
Tim Carr, “Talk That Talk, Walk That Walk,” 
Rolling Stone, 26 May 1983, 22.
 
35.
 
Jeff Chang, Can’t Stop Won’t Stop: A History of the 
Hip-Hop Generation (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 
2005), 13.
 
36.
 
David Toop, The Rap Attack 2: African Rap to Global 
Hip Hop (London: Serpent’s Tail, 1991), 154.
 
37.
 
Grandmaster Flash with David Ritz, The Adven-
tures of Grandmaster Flash: My Life, My Beats (New York: Harlem Moon, 2008), 79.
 
38.
 
For an excellent explication of the (primarily) 
Puerto Rican involvement in early rap as a conjunctive (rather than merely additive) experience, see Juan Flores, From Bomba to Hip Hop: Puerto Rican Culture and Latino Identity (New York: Columbia University Press, 2000). See also Raquel Z. Rivera, “Boricuas from the Hip Hop Zone: Notes on Race and Ethnic Relations in New York City,” Centro Journal (Spring 1996), 202–215.
 
39.
 
Dan Charnas, The Big Payback: The History of the 
Business of Hip-Hop (New York: New American Library, 2010), 35.
 
40.
 
Steven Hager, Hip Hop: The Illustrated History of 
Break Dancing, Rap Music, and Graffiti (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1984), 91.
 
41.
 
Details about the founding of Def Jam can be 
found in Charnas, The Big Payback, 134–140.
 
42.
 
Chang, Can’t Stop Won’t Stop, 315.
 
43.
 
Brian Cross, It’s Not About a Salary: Rap, Race and 
Resistance in Los Angeles (New York: Verso, 1993), 50.
 
44.
 
Alex Henderson, “ Active Indies,” Billboard, 24 De-
cember 1988, R-16.
 
45.
 
Ibid., R-8.
 
46.
 
Dan Stuart, “Black Radio,” Billboard, 17 June 1989, 
B-12.
 
47.
 
Henderson, “ Active Indies,” R-21.
 
48.
 
Jon Pareles, “There’s a New Sound in Pop Music: 
Bigotry,” New York Times, 10 September 1989, Arts and 
Leisure, 1. NOTES 483 49.  Ibid., 33. 
 
50.
 
Harry Allen, “Hip Hop Madness: From Def Jams 
to Cold Lampin’, Rap Is Our Music,” Essence, April 1989, 
117.
 
51.
 
Ibid.
 
52.
 
Toop, The Rap Attack 2, 200.
 
53.
 
For an excellent discussion of this complexity, see 
Rose, Black Noise, 146–182.
 
54.
 
Toop, The Rap Attack 2, 201.
 
55.
 
David Nathan, “Rap,” Billboard, 24 December 
1988, R-5.
 
56.
 
Columbia Records negotiated a custom label deal 
with Def Jam (LL Cool J, Oran ‘Juice’ Jones, the Beas-
tie Boys, Public Enemy) in 1985. Jive Records (Whodini, Kool Moe Dee, Steady B., D. J. Jazzy Jeff & the Fresh Prince, Boogie Down Productions) entered into distri-bution arrangements with both RCA and Arista. Cold Chillin’ Records (Marly Marl, Roxanne Shanté, Biz Mar-kie, M. C. Shan) signed a distribution deal with Warner in 1987. Warner also bought a piece of Tommy Boy (Stetsasonic, Force MDs, De La Soul, Queen Latifah, Black by Demand, Digital Underground). Delicious Vi-nyl (Tone Loc, Def Jef, Young M.C.) concluded a national distribution deal with Island. National distribution for Priority (N.W .A., Eazy E, Ice Cube) went to Capitol.
 
57.
 
Craig Watkins, Representing: Hip Hop Culture and 
the Production of Black Cinema (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 198.
 
58.
 
Kristal Brent Zook, “Reconstructions of National-
ist Thought in Black Music and Culture,” in Rockin’ the Boat: Mass Music and Mass Movements, ed. Reebee Garo-falo (Boston: South End Press, 1992), 262.
 
59.
 
Toop, The Rap Attack 2, 185.
 
60.
 
Cross, It’s Not About a Salary, 58.
 
61.
 
Ibid.
 
62.
 
Herman Gray, “Popular Music as a Social Prob-
lem: A Social History of Claims Against Popular Mu-sic,” in Images of Issues, ed. Joel Best (Hawthorne, NY: De Gruyter, 1989), 143–158.
 
63.
 
See Lawrence Grossberg, We Gotta Get Out of This 
Place: Popular Conservatism and Postmodern Culture (New York: Routledge, 1992). For an abbreviated treatment of this discussion, see Lawrence Grossberg, “The Framing of Rock: Rock and the New Conservatism,” in Rock and 
Popular Music: Politics, Policies, Institutions, ed. Tony Ben-nett et al. (New York: Routledge, 1993), 195.
 
64.
 
Nan Levinson, “Shut Up,” Boston Globe , 20 Febru-
ary 1994, 79.
 
65.
 
Susan McClary and Robert Walser, “Start Making 
Sense: Musicology Wrestles with Rock,” in On Record: Rock, Pop, and the Written Word, ed. Simon Frith and An-
drew Goodwin (New York: Pantheon Books, 1990), 278.
 
66.
 
Martin and Segrave, Anti-Rock, 292.
 
67.
 
U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Commerce, 
Science, and Transportation, Record Labeling, 99th Cong., 
1st sess., 1985, 11, quoted in Herman Gray, “Rate the 
 
Records: Symbolic Conflict, Popular Music, and Social Problems,” Popular Music and Society (Fall 1989), 6–7.
 
68.
 
On the history of film censorship and the advent of 
the modern film rating system, see Jon Lewis, Hollywood v. Hard Core: How the Struggle over Censorship Saved the Modern Film Industry (New York: New York University Press, 2000).
 
69.
 
Steven Dougherty, “Parents vs. Rock,” People, 16 
September 1985, 50.
 
70.
 
Simon Frith, Sound Effects: Youth, Leisure, and the 
Politics of Rock ‘n’ Roll (New York: Pantheon Books, 
1981), 175.
 
71.
 
Dougherty, “Parents vs. Rock,” 50.
 
72.
 
Gray, “Rate the Records,” 9.
 
73.
 
Frank Zappa, “The Porn Wars,” Penthouse, May 
1989, 78.
 
74.
 
Editorial, Rolling Stone, 7 November 1985, 10.
 
75.
 
PMRC Video, Rising to the Challenge, produced by 
Teen Vision, Inc., 1989.
 
76.
 
Ibid.
 
77.
 
Ibid.
 
78.
 
Walser, Running with the Devil, 140.
 
79.
 
Dougherty, “Parents vs. Rock,” 52.
 
80.
 
Dave Marsh, “What’s Being Sold in Country?” 
New York Times, 24 May 1992, 20.
 
81.
 
Ibid.
 
82.
 
Robin Denselow, When the Music’s Over: The Story 
of Political Pop (Boston, MA: Faber and Faber, 1989), 267.
 
83.
 
U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Commerce, 
Science, and Transportation, Record Labeling, 99th Cong., 1st sess., 1985, 11, quoted in Gray, “Rate the Records,” 10.
 
84.
 
David Thigpen, “Up Against the Wall,” Rolling 
Stone, 24 February 1994, 16.
 
85.
 
Marjorie Heins, Sex, Sin and Blasphemy: A Guide 
to America’s Censorship Wars  (New York: The New Press, 
1993), 90.
 
86.
 
Ibid., 89.
 
87.
 
Ibid., 92.
 
88.
 
Walser, Running with the Devil, 150.
 
89.
 
ABC, 20/20, segment on heavy metal, produced by 
Danny Schechter, 1987.484  ROCKIN ’ OUT 90.  Lynn Minton, “Is Heavy Metal Dangerous?” Pa -
rade, 20 September 1992, 12.
 
91.
 
Donna Gaines, Teenage Wasteland: Suburbia’s Dead 
End Kids (New York: Pantheon, 1991), 204.
 
92.
 
K. Zimmerman, “Priest Ruling Gives Unclear 
Message,” V ariety, 3 September 1990, 8, quoted in Steve 
Jones, “Ban(ned) in the USA: Popular Music and Censor-
ship,” Journal of Communication Inquiry (Winter 1991), 
77.
 
93.
 
The editors of Rock & Roll Confidential, You’ve Got 
a Right to Rock (Los Angeles: Duke and Duchess Ven-tures, Inc., 1990), 6.
 
94.
 
Richard N. Ostling, “No Sympathy for the Devil,” 
Time, 19 March 1990, 56. Eileen Luhr also notes the 
overlap between PMRC efforts and Christian conserva-tive positions on popular culture in Witnessing Suburbia: Conservatives and Christian Youth Culture (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2009), 34–37.
 
95.
 
Robert J. Barry, “Satanism: The Law Enforcement 
Response,” The National Sheriff, February/March 1987, 
40.
 
96.
 
David Alexander, “Giving the Devil More Than 
His Due,” The Humanist, March/April 1990, quoted in Walser, Running with the Devil, 199–200.
 
97.
 
Barry, “Satanism,” 39.
 
98.
 
Ibid., 41.
 
99.
 
Ostling, “No Sympathy for the Devil,” 56.
 
100.
 
Reuters, “Of Hard-Rock Demons: A Cardinal 
Speaks Out,” Boston Globe, 6 March 1990, 23.
 
101.
 
Peter Steinfels, “Surge in Satanic Activity Alarms 
O’Connor,” New York Times, 6 March 1990, B-6.
 
102.
 
Pareles, “There’s a New Sound in Pop Music: Big-
otry,” 1, 32–33.
 
103.
 
Dennis Wharton, “D.C. Bluebloods Want X Rat-
ing for Porn Rock,” V ariety, 22 May 1985, quoted in Mar-tin and Segrave, Anti-Rock, 293.
 
104.
 
Jello Biafra, “The Far Right and the Censorship of 
Music,” Harvard Law Record (17 April 1987), 12.
 
105.
 
Ibid.
 
106.
 
Heins, Sex, Sin, and Blasphemy, 22–24.
 
107.
 
Henry Louis Gates, Jr., “2 Live Crew, Decoded,” 
New York Times, 9 June 1990, A-23.
 
108.
 
Brechner Center for Freedom of Information, 
The Brechner Report (Gainesville: University of Florida, 1992), 2.
 
109.
 
David Mills, “Rap as Politics: The Sayings of Sis-
ter Souljah,” Essence, September 1992, 20.
 
110.
 
Alan Light, “Ice,” Rolling Stone, 20 August 1992, 
30. 111.  Barry Shank, “Fears of the White Unconscious: 
Music, Race, and Identification in the Censorship of 
‘Cop Killer’,” Radical History Review (Vol. 66, Fall 1996), 139–140.
 
112.
 
Charlene Orr et al., “Texas Police Pursue ‘Cop 
Killer,’” Billboard, 27 June 1992, 79.
 
113.
 
Greg Sandow, “Fire & Ice,” Entertainment Weekly, 
14 August 1992, 32.
 
114.
 
Touré, “Snoop Dogg’s Gentle Hip Hop Growl,” 
New York Times, 21 November 1993, 32.
 
115.
 
Havelock Nelson, “Music and Violence: Does 
Crime Pay?” Billboard, 13 November 1993, 109.
 
116.
 
Havelock Nelson, “The Rap Column,” Billboard, 4 
December 1993, 30.
 
117.
 
Toop, The Rap Attack 2, 170.
 
118.
 
Bill Holland, “Senate Hearing Examines Gangsta 
Lyrics,” Billboard, 5 March 1994, 10.
 
119.
 
Ibid., 10.
chapter 11
 1.  Mikal Gilmore, “The Year in Music,” Rolling Stone, 
13–27 December 1990, 13.
 
2.
 
Gina Arnold, Route 666: The Road to Nirvana (New 
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1993); Michael Azerrad, Our 
Band Could Be Your Life: Scenes from the American Indie Underground, 1981–1991 (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 2001).
 
3.
 
Richard Stevenson, “G.E. to Sell Its Holding in 
RCA/Ariola Records,” New York Times, 10 September 1986, D-1.
 
4.
 
Details concerning the formation of the Universal 
Music Group can be found in Peter Tschmuck, Creativity and Innovation in the Music Industry, E-book ed. (Berlin: 
Springer, 2012), 178–179; Steve Knopper, Appetite for Self-Destruction: The Spectacular Crash of the Record In-dustry in the Digital Age (New York: Free Press, 2009), 63–65.
 
5.
 
Steve Lohr, “Media Mergers: An Urge to Get Big-
ger and More Global,” New York Times, 19 March 1989, Section 4, 7.
 
6.
 
Anthony DeCurtis, “The Year in Music,” Rolling 
Stone, 10–24 December 1992, 26.
 
7.
 
“1990 Yearbook,” Rolling Stone, 13–27 December 
1990, 72.
 
8.
 
“Janet Jackson Inks Record $50 Mil. Deal with 
Virgin Records,” Jet , 25 March 1991, 60.
 
9.
 
Fred Goodman, “Big Deals: How Money Fever Is 
Changing the Music Business,” Musician, January 1992, 42. NOTES 485 10.  Tschmuck, Creativity and Innovation in the Music In-
dustry, 175.
 
11.
 
Neil Strauss, “For Record Industry, All Signs Are 
Gloomy,” New York Times, 4 December 1996, A-1.
 
12.
 
Knopper, Appetite for Self-Destruction, 80–104; 
Tshmuck, Creativity and Innovation in the Music Industry, 
175, 182.
 
13.
 
Anthony Bozza, “NSynchronicity,” Rolling Stone, 
30 March 2000, 55.
 
14.
 
Touré, “True Tales of the Pop Life: ’N Sync,” Roll-
ing Stone, 16 August 2001, 66.
 
15.
 
Steven Daly, “Britney Spears: Inside the Heart and 
Mind (and Bedroom) of America’s New Teen Queen,” 
Rolling Stone, 15 April 1999, 65.
 
16.
 
Peter Kafka, “The Queen of Teen,” Forbes, 20 
March 2000, 162.
 
17.
 
Chris Heath, “Has Anyone Seen Christina?” Roll-
ing Stone, 14 November 2001, 55.
 
18.
 
Howard Lander, “ A Letter from the Publisher: 
Billboard Debuts Piece Counts On Two Music Sales Charts,” Billboard, 25 May 1991, 1.
 
19.
 
Richard Harrington, “Charting SoundScan’s 
Shake-up,” Washington Post, 19 June 1991, F-7.
 
20.
 
Kim Neely, “ Alternative Music,” Rolling Stone, 10–
24 December 1992, 43.
 
21.
 
Ibid.
 
22.
 
Arnold, Route 666, 62.
 
23.
 
For an overview of Seattle rock’s larger history, 
see Peter Blecha, Sonic Boom: The History of Northwest Rock, from “Louie Louie” to “Smells Like Teen Spirit” (New York: Backbeat Books, 2009).
 
24.
 
Steve Waksman, This Ain’t the Summer of Love: 
Conflict and Crossover in Heavy Metal and Punk  (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2009), 246–250, and Az-errad, Our Band Could Be Your Life, 436–440.
 
25.
 
Michael Azerrad, Come As You Are: The Story of 
Nirvana (New York: Main Street Books, 1993), 163.
 
26.
 
Anthony DeCurtis, “Kurt Cobain, 1967–1994,” 
Rolling Stone, 2 June 1994, 30.
 
27.
 
Charles Cross, Heavier Than Heaven: A Biography of 
Kurt Cobain (New York: Hyperion, 2001), 278.
 
28.
 
Donna Gaines, “Suicidal Tendencies: Kurt Did Not 
Die for You,” Rolling Stone, 2 June 1994, 67.
 
29.
 
David Fricke, “Lollapalooza,” Rolling Stone, 19 
September 1991, 14.
 
30.
 
Jim Sullivan, “Lollapalooza: The Sound of Suc-
cess,” Boston Globe, 2 August 1992, B-25.
 
31.
 
Jon Pareles, “Howls of Rage, Nine Hours Worth, at 
Waterloo Village,” New York Times, 13 August 1991, C-13.  32.  Peter Watrous, “Good Things Happen to Lolla-
palooza,” New York Times, 5 August 1992, C-13.
 
33.
 
Al Flipside, “Lollapalooza,” Flipside, September–
October 1991, n.p.
 
34.
 
David Fricke, “Red Hot Chili Peppers’ Naked 
Truth,” Rolling Stone, 25 June 1992, 29.
 
35.
 
Kim Neely, “Lollapalooza ’92,” Rolling Stone, 17 
September 1992, 62.
 
36.
 
Gina Arnold, Kiss This: Punk in the Present Tense  
(London: Pan Books, 1998), 75.
 
37.
 
For a more expansive view of these developments 
and their aftermath, see Matt Diehl, My So-Called Punk: 
Green Day, Fall Out Boy, The Distillers, Bad Religion—
How Neo-Punk Stage Dived into the Mainstream (New York: St. Martin’s, 2007).
 
38.
 
Anthony DeCurtis, “Ropin’ the Whirl Wind,” 
Rolling Stone, 1 April 1993, 35.
 
39.
 
Rick Lyman, “New Data Shows Immigrants’ 
Growth and Reach,” New York Times, 15 August 2006, 1.
 
40.
 
U.S. Census Bureau, “Table 11 Population by 
Sex, Age, Hispanic Origin, and Race: 2004.” http://www.census.gov/population/socdemo/hispanic/ASEC2004/2004CPS_tab1.1a.html.
 
41.
 
Lyman, “New Data Shows Immigrants’ Growth 
and Reach,” 1.
 
42.
 
Joseph P . Kahn, “Musical Chairs Coming Up for 
the White House,” Boston Globe, 20 January 2001, C-2.
 
43.
 
Chris Heath, “The Epic Life of Carlos Santana,” 
Rolling Stone, 16 March 2000, 41.
 
44.
 
Mim Udovitch, “Shakira,” Rolling Stone, 31 Octo-
ber 2002, 102.
 
45.
 
LARAS, “Universe of Rhythms: The Grammys 
Guide to Latin Music,” 2000. http://www.grammy.com/press/guide_eng.html.
 
46.
 
Deborah Pacini Hernandez, “Race, Ethnicity and 
the Production of Latin/o Popular Music,” in Global Rep -
ertoires: Popular Music within and beyond the Transnational Music Industry, ed. Andreas Gabesmair and Alfred Smudits (Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing Ltd., 2001).
 
47.
 
Leila Cobo, “Reggaeton Broke Out but Regional 
Mexican Acts Drove Latin Biz,” Billboard, Special Sec-tion, 24 December 2005, 20.
 
48.
 
Interview with DJ Velcro, Deborah Pacini Her-
nandez, and Reebee Garofalo, San Juan, Puerto Rico, 10 May 2006.
 
49.
 
Agustin Gurza, “The Reggaeton Craze Saw a 
Quick Burnout with Fans and Radio,” Chicago Tribune, 19 April 2006, 3.
 
50.
 
Leila Cobo, “Radio Flips for Reggaeton,” Billboard, 
10 September 2005, 47.486  ROCKIN ’ OUT 51.  Greg Kot, “R. Kelly Profile: Legal Woes Don’t 
Stop the Music,” Chicago Tribune, 9 May 2008. http://
www.chicagotribune.com/news/nationworld/chi-r-
kelly-0509may09,0,3990976.story.
 
52.
 
 Lola Ogunnaike, “Caught in the Act,” Vibe, May 
2002, 92.
 
53.
 
Mark Anthony Neal, “The Tortured Soul of Mar-
vin Gaye and R. Kelly.” PopMatters, 3 August 2003. 
http://www.popmatters.com/pm/feature/031103-rkelly.
 
54.
 
Keith Negus, Music Genres and Corporate Cultures  
(New York: Routledge, 1999), 85.
 
55.
 
Mikal Gilmore, “Puff Daddy,” Rolling Stone, 7 Au -
gust 1997, 72.
 
56.
 
Fred Schruers, “Master P ,” Rolling Stone, 29 Octo -
ber 1998, 42.
 
57.
 
Dan Charnas, The Big Payback: The History of the 
Business of Hip-Hop (New York: New American Library, 
2010), 530.
 
58.
 
Nelson George, Buppies, B-Boys, Baps and Bohos: 
Notes on Post-Soul Black Culture (New York: HarperCol-lins, 1992), 80.
 
59.
 
Tony Green, “The Dirty South,” in The VIBE His-
tory of Hip Hop, ed. Alan Light (New York: Three Rivers Press, 1999).
 
60.
 
Murray Forman, “‘Represent’: Race, Space and 
Place in Rap Music,” Popular Music, January 2000, 68–69.
 
61.
 
David Bry, “The Song of the South,” Vibe, June 
2002, 94.
 
62.
 
Ibid., 100.
 
63.
 
Charnas, The Big Payback, 450.
 
64.
 
“The Hip-Hop 50,” Rolling Stone, 29 October 1998, 
45–57.
 
65.
 
Touré, “DMX Reigns as the Dark Prince of Hip 
Hop,” Rolling Stone, 13 April 2000, 85.
 
66.
 
Nathaniel Welch, “Hit Man,” Rolling Stone, 22 Au-
gust 2002, 54.
 
67.
 
Joan Anderman, “Hip-Hop Setting the Beat,” Boston 
Globe, 4 October 2003. http://www.boston.com/news/local/articles/2003/10/04/hip_hop_setting_the_beat/.
 
68.
 
Charnas, The Big Payback, 617.
 
69.
 
Silvio Pietroluongo, Minal Patel, and Wade Jessen, 
“Singles Minded: Hot 100 Adds Digital Sales; Pop 100 Debuts,” Billboard, 12 February 2005, 64.
 
70.
 
Bill Lamb, “How to Read the Billboard Charts,” 
About.com. http://top40.about.com/od/popmusic101/a/billboardcharts.htm. Retrieved 26 August 2006.
 
71.
 
Monifa Young, “Interview with Lauryn Hill,” Es-
sence, June 1998, 74.  72.  Vanessa E. Jones, “Whose Word Is It Anyway?” 
Boston Globe, 7 July 1999, D-1.
 
73.
 
Charles Aaron, “What the White Boy Means 
When He Says Yo,” in And It Don’t Stop: The Best Ameri-
can Hip-Hop Journalism of the Last 25 Years, ed. Raquel 
Cepeda (New York: Faber and Faber, 2004), 215.
 
74.
 
Renée Graham, “Is Some Hatred More Acceptable 
Than Others?” Boston Globe, 5 January 2001, C-1.
 
75.
 
Ann Powers, “Salting Raps with Humor, Mining 
Hip-Hop for Fun,” New York Times, 14 March 2001. 
http://www.nytimes.com/2001/03/14/arts/pop-re-view-salting-raps-with-humor-mining-hip-hop-for-fun.html.
 
76.
 
Josh Tyrangiel, “You Can’t Ignore Kanye,” Time, 
29 August 2005, 54.
 
77.
 
Tom Breihan, “Lil Wayne: Best Rapper Ever?” Vil -
lage Voice, 19 October 2005. http://blogs.villagevoice.
com/statusainthood/2005/10/lil_wayne_best.php.
 
78.
 
Ryan Dombai, review of Drake, Thank Me Later, 
Pitchfork, 15 June 2010. http://pitchfork.com/reviews/albums/14367-thank-me-later/.
 
79.
 
Jon Caraminica, “ A Singular Influence,” New 
York Times, 30 March 2012. http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/01/arts/music/nicki-minaj-is-the-influ-ential-leader-of-hip-hop.html?pagewanted=all.
 
80.
 
Ibid.
 
81.
 
Riot Grrrl has generated considerable scholarly 
comment in the years since its emergence, judged by many as a significant moment in the history of women’s and girls’ cultural production and what has been termed “third wave feminism.” Key sources include Joanne Got-tlieb and Gayle Wald, “Smells Like Teen Spirit: Riot Grrrls, Revolution and Women in Independent Rock,” in Microphone Fiends: Youth Music and Youth Culture, ed. An-drew Ross and Tricia Rose (New York: Routledge, 1994), 250–274; Mary Kearney, Girls Make Media (New York: Routledge, 2006); Marion Leonard, Gender in the Music 
Industry: Rock, Discourse and Girl Power (Aldershot, UK: Ashgate, 2007); Sara Marcus, Girls to the Front: The True 
Story of the Riot Grrrl Revolution (New York: HarperPe-rennial, 2010).
 
82.
 
Steve Morse, “In Pop, Women Took New Ground 
All Over,” Boston Globe, 29 December 1996, N-6.
 
83.
 
James Sullivan, “Three’s the Charm as the Last Li-
lith All-Women Music Festival Loses Its Sensitive Side,” San Francisco Chronicle, 15 July 1999, reported on Geoci-ties.com. http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/1999/07/15/DD90915.DTL.
 
84.
 
Ibid.
 
85.
 
Noreen Malone, “ A Brief History of Beyoncé’s 
Female Empowerment Anthems,” Slate, 20 April 2011.  NOTES 487http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2011/04/20/
girls_who_run_this_world_the_new_beyonce_single.html.
 
86.
 
Touré, “The Next Queen of Soul,” Rolling Stone, 8 
November 2001, 84.
 
87.
 
Mark Binelli, “The Accidental Superstar,” Rolling 
Stone, 18 March 2004, 54.
 
88.
 
Bill Werde, “ Artist of the Year: Taylor Swift,” Bill-
board, 19 December 2009, 14.
 
89.
 
Tom Roland, “How Sparks Fly,” Billboard , 10 De-
cember 2011, 22.
 
90.
 
Ann Powers, “Frank Talk with Lady Gaga,” 
Los Angeles Times, 13 December 2009. http://ar-
ticles.latimes.com/2009/dec/13/entertainment/la-ca-lady-gaga13-2009dec13.
 
91.
 
Julianne Escobedo Shepherd, “‘21’ & Up,” Bill-
board, 17 December 2011. http://search.proquest.com.ezproxy.library.tufts.edu/docview/912679025/fulltext/135BAB89891D36FCB5/2?accountid=14434.
 
92.
 
Touré, “Best Soul Superstar: Adele,” Rolling Stone, 
28 April 2011, 56.
chapter 12
 1.  D. Davey “Boots Speaks Out About 9/11,” Davey 
D’s Hip Hop Corner, 20 September 2001. http://www.
daveyd.com/bootsonthewarpolitics.html.
 
2.
 
Brian Garrity, “Music Biz Gets a Makeover,” Bill-
board, 25 December 2004, YE-53.
 
3.
 
Steve Knopper, “How the Universal-EMI Deal 
Will Change the Music Industry,” Rolling Stone, 8 De-
cember 2011. http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/how-the-universal-emi-deal-will-change-the-mu-sic-industry-20111123.
 
4.
 
Jonathan Sterne, “The Mp3 as Cultural Artifact,” 
New Media and Society (Vol. 8, No. 5, 2006), 835.
 
5.
 
Vito Peraino, “The Law of Increasing Returns,” 
Wired, August 1999, 144.
 
6.
 
Rachel Konrad, “Napster Among Fastest-Growing 
Net Technologies,” CNETNews.com, 5 October 2000. 
http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1005-200-2938703.html.
 
7.
 
U.S. Constitution, Article 1, § 8, Cl. 8.
 
8.
 
William Fisher, “Theories of Intellectual Prop-
erty,” 2000. http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/people/tfisher/iptheory.pdf.
 
9.
 
H.R. Rep. No. 609, 100 Congress, 2nd session 23, 
1988. Cited in L. Ray Patterson and Stanley W . Lind-berg, The Nature of Copyright: A Law of User’s Rights  
(Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 1991), 49. 
10.
 
Kenneth Cohen et al., “No Electronic Theft Act: 
Policy Development Team Report,” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Sentencing Commission, February 1999, 2.
 
11.
 
Reuters, “Prince Voices Support for Napster,” 
CNETNews.com, 9 August 2000. http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1005-200-2482624.html.
 
12.
 
Statement of Roger McGuinn, “Senate Judiciary 
Committee Hearing on Music on the Internet: Is There an Upside to Downloading?.” 11 July 2000. http://frwe-bgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=106_senate_hearings&docid=f:74728.pdf.
 
13.
 
Ibid.
 
14.
 
See Ron Harris, “Metallica to Napster: Cut Users,” 
Boston Globe, 4 May 2000, E-4; Steve Morse, “Napster 
Strikes Dissonant Chords,” Boston Globe, 5 May 2000, D-18.
 
15.
 
John Borland, “Napster Says 30,000 Metallica 
Fans Appeal Ban,” CNET, 16 May 2000. http://news.cnet.com/Napster-says-30,000-Metallica-fans-appeal-ban/2100-1023_3-240611.html.
 
16.
 
P . J. Huffstutter, “Music Makers at Wits’ End in 
Battle with Internet Takers,” Los Angeles Times, 29 May 
2000, A-14.
 
17.
 
Steve Knopper, Appetite for Self-Destruction: The 
Spectacular Crash of the Record Industry in the Digital Age  
(New York: Free Press, 2009), 138–142. 18. Barry Kernfeld, Pop Song Piracy: Disobedient Music 
Distribution since 1929 (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2011).
 
19.
 
Mark Latonero, “Survey of MP3 Usage: Report 
on a University Consumption Community,” the Norman 
Lear Center, Annenberg School for Communication, University of Southern California, June 2000, 2.
 
20.
 
“Playboy Poll: Napster Users Buy CDs,” MP3 
Newswire, 17 August 2000. http://www.mp3newswire.net/stories/2000/playboy.html.
 
21.
 
RIAA Press Release, “Record Industry Announces 
2000 Midyear Shipment Data,” Washington, D.C., 25 August  
2000. http://www.riaa.com/newsitem.php?news_month_  
filter=8&news_year_filter=2000&resultpage=&id=352
5ABBC-B110-C3F5-8B63-AC4D3802C9C2.
 
22.
 
Bloomberg News, “FTC Slams Record Labels on 
CD Sales Practice,” 10 May 2000. http://news.cnet.com/2100-1023-240383.html.
 
23.
 
Hiawatha Bray, “Hackers Go One Up,” Boston 
Globe, 26 October 2000, C-1.
 
24.
 
Reuters, “Music Industry Still in First Gear On-
line,” 7 January 2002. http://news.com.com/2100-1023802359.html.
 
25.
 
Amy Harmon, “Music Industry in Global Fight on 
Web Copies,” New York Times, 7 October 2002. http://488  ROCKIN ’ OUTwww.nytimes.com/2002/10/07/technology/07SWAP .
html.
 
26.
 
John Borland, “Judge: File-Swapping Tools Are 
Legal,” CNETNews.com, 25 April 2003. http://news.
cnet.com/2100-1027-998363.html.
 
27.
 
Brian Garrity, “Grokster Blasts RIAA Anti-
Piracy Tactics,” Billboard.com, 27 June 2003. Posted 
on FreeRepublic.com. http://209.157.64.200/focus/f-news/936821/posts.
 
28.
 
“New P2P File Sharing Stats,” p2pnet.net News, 22 
October 2004. http://p2pnet.net/story/2797.
 
29.
 
Neil Strauss, “File-Sharing Battle Leaves Musi -
cians Caught in Middle,” New York Times, 14 Septem-ber 2003. http://www.nytimes.com/2003/09/14/
technology/14MUSI.html.
 
30.
 
John Schwartz, “ A Heretical View of File Sharing,” 
New York Times, 5 April 2004. http://www.nytimes.com/2004/04/05/technology/05music.html.
 
31.
 
Beth Potier, “File Sharing May Boost CD Sales: 
Study Defies Traditional Beliefs About Internet Use,” Harvard Gazette Archives, 15 April 2004. http://www.news.harvard.edu/gazette/2004/04.15/09-filesharing.html.
 
32.
 
Editorial, “The Sound of Lawsuits,” San Jose Mer -
cury News, 9 September 2003. http://www.bayarea.com/mld/mercurynews/news/opinion/6727444.htm.
 
33.
 
Sue Zeidler, “Music Industry Sends Warning to 
Song Swappers,” Yahoo News, 29 April 2003. http://msl1.mit.edu/furdlog/docs/2003-04-29_yahoo_  
reuters_riaa_threat.pdf.
 
34.
 
Andy Sullivan, “Music Firms, DJ Offer to Pay 
12-Year-Old’s Fine,” Reuters, 11 September 2003. http://www.reuters.com/newsArticle.jhtml;jsessionid=GJHB5ZIZY5BACRBAEKSFFA?type=topNews&storyID=3431108.
 
35.
 
RIAA v. the People: Two Years Later, Electronic 
Frontier Foundation, 2005. http://w2.eff.org/IP/P2P/RIAAatTWO_FINAL.pdf.
 
36.
 
Staff and Agencies, “Music Industry Counts 
the Cost of Online Piracy,” The Guardian, 4 April 2006. http://arts.guardian.co.uk/netmusic/story/0,,1746741,00.html.
 
37.
 
Bruce Gain, “RIAA Takes Shotgun to Traders,” 
Wired News, 4 October 2005. http://www.wired.com/entertainment/music/news/2005/10/68951.
 
38.
 
Heather Green, “Does She Look Like a Music Pi-
rate?” Business Week, 5 May 2008. http://www.business-
week.com/magazine/content/08_18/b4082042959954.htm.
 
39.
 
Greg Kot, Ripped: How the Wired Generation Revo -
lutionized Music (New York: Scribner, 2009), 53–55; Greg Sandoval, “Judgment Against Jammie Thomas Lowered 
from $1.5 Million to $54,000,” CNETNews.com, 22 July 2011. http://news.cnet.com/8301-31001_3-20081934-261/jammie-thomas-judgment-lowered-from-$1.5-mil-lion-to-$54000.
 
40.
 
Justice David Souter, MGM v. Grokster. Supreme 
Court of the United States, No. 04–480, 27 June 2005.
 
41.
 
Ibid.
 
42.
 
Ibid.
 
43.
 
“Roxio Buys Pressplay, to Relaunch Napster,” Sa-
lon.com, 19 May 2003. http://www.salon.com/tech/
wire/2003/05/19/roxio_pressplay/index.html.
 
44.
 
Matthew Yi, “One Billion Songs Sold on iTunes,” 
San Francisco Chronicle, 24 February 2006. http://www.
sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2006/02/24/BUG9THDRI31.DTL.
 
45.
 
Knopper, Appetite for Self-Destruction, 179.
 
46.
 
Jeffrey Melnick, 9/11 Culture (Malden, MA: Wi-
ley-Blackwell, 2009), 56.
 
47.
 
Alec Foege, Right of the Dial: The Rise of Clear 
Channel and the Fall of Commercial Radio  (New York: Fa-
ber and Faber, 2008), 138–141.
 
48.
 
Ray Waddell, “Touring Strong, but Some Num-
bers Cause Concern,” Billboard, 28 December 2002, 77.
 
49.
 
Cynthia Cotts, “Telecom for Dummies, Village 
Voice, 5–11 September 2001. http://www.villagevoice.com/2001-09-04/news/telecom-for-dummies/.
 
50.
 
Greg Kot, “What’s Wrong with Radio,” Rolling 
Stone, 16 August 2001, 25.
 
51.
 
Tim Jones, “Media Giant’s Rally Sponsorship 
Raises Questions,” Chicago Tribune, 19 March 2003. http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/showcase/  
chi-0303190157mar19.story.
 
52.
 
Ibid.
 
53.
 
Paul Krugman, “Channels of Influence,” New 
York Times, 25 March 2003. http://www.nytimes.com/2003/03/25/opinion/25KRUG.html.
 
54.
 
Tom Roland, “Lee Greenwood,” All Music Guide, 
n.d. http://www.allmusic.com/cg/amg.dll?p=amg&uid=CASS80310101206&sql=B3srz286c054a.
 
55.
 
Peter Schmelz, “‘Have You Forgotten?’: Darryl Wor-
ley and the Musical Politics of Operation Iraqi Freedom,” in Music in the Post-9/11 World, ed. Jonathan Ritter and J. 
Martin Daughtry (New York: Routledge, 2007), 131.
 
56.
 
Jenny Eliscu, “Chicks Triumph,” Rolling Stone , 29 
May 2003, 10.
 
57.
 
Joan Anderman, “Dixie Chicks: A Brief History of an 
Outspoken Band,” Boston Globe, 28 July 2006. http://www.
boston.com/news/globe/living/articles/2006/07/28/dixie_chicks_a_brief_history_of_an_outspoken_band/. NOTES 489 58.  Joseph Schumacher, “Is Protest Music as Dead as 
Disco?” Peace and Conflict Monitor, 12 May 2003. http://
www.monitor.upeace.org/innerpg.cfm?id_article=5.
 
59.
 
Brent Staples, “The Trouble with Corporate Radio: 
The Day the Protest Music Died,” New York Times, 20 
February 2003. http://www.nytimes.com/2003/02/20/opinion/20THU4.html.
 
60.
 
Jeff Chang, “Is Protest Music Dead?” Counter -
Punch, 2 April 2002. http://www.counterpunch.org/changprotestmusic.html.
 
61.
 
“N.J. Rock Station Won’t Play Jethro Tull,” As-
sociated Press, 13 November 2003. http://new.music.yahoo.com/jethro-tull/news/n-j-rock-station-wont-play-  
jethro-tull—12175162;_ylt=AlcZ18t0YGd5y3xXuLx85
FgQxCUv.
 
62.
 
Posted on the MoveOn website: http://www.
moveon.org/musiciansunited/.
 
63.
 
Kristin V . Jones, “Rocking the Hip Hop Vote,” The 
Nation, 1 December 2003, 8.
 
64.
 
Edna Gundersen, “For Springsteen, ‘Seeger Ses-
sions’ Sends a Message,” USA Today, 7 June 2006, D-3.
 
65.
 
Because these styles are often presented ahistori-
cally, the listening public has been deluged with a smor-gasbord of over 300 sub-subgenres, of which Kembrew McLeod has distilled an edited list that includes: “ Ab-stract Beat, Abstract Drum-n-Bass, Acid House, Acid Rave, Acid-Beats, Acid-Funk, Acid-Techno, Alchemic House, Ambient Dance, Ambient Drum-n-Bass, Amyl House, Analogue Electro-Funk, Aquatic Techno-Funk, Aquatic-House, Atomic Breaks, Avant-Techno, Bass, Big Beat, Bleep-n-Bass, Blunted Beats, Breakbeat, Chemical Beats, Chicago Garage, Chicago House, Coldwave, Cos-mic Dance, Cyber Hardcore, Cybertech, Dark Ambient, Downtempo Funk, Downtempo Future Jazz, Drill-n-Bass, Dronecore, Drum-n-Bass, Dub, Dub-Funk, Dub-Hop, Dub-n-Bass, Electro, Electro-Acoustic, Electro-Breaks, Electro-Dub, Freestyle, Future Jazz, Futuristic Break-beat, Futuristic Hardbeats, Futuristic Hardstep, Gab-ber, Garage, Global House, Global Trance, Goa-Trance, Happy Hardcore, Hardcore Techno, Hard Chill Ambient, Intelligent Drum-n-Bass, Intelligent Jungle, Intelligent Techno, Miami Bass Minimal Techno, Minimal Trance, Morphing, Mutant Techno, Mutated Minimal Techno, Mystic-Step, Neurofunk, Noir-House, Nu-Dark Jungle, Old School, Organic Chill Out, Organic Electro, Organic Electronica, Progressive House, Progressive Low Fre-quency, Progressive Trance, Ragga, Ragga-Jungle, Rave, Techstep, Techxotica, Trance, Trancecore, Trance-Dub, Tribal, Tribal Beats, Tribal House, Tribal Soul, Trip-Hop, Tripno, Twilight Electronica, Two-Step, UK Acid, UK Breakbeat, Underground, World-Dance.” See “Genres, Sub-Genres, Sub-Sub-Genres and More: Musical and 
Social Differentiation within Electronic-Dance Music Communities,” Journal of Popular Music Studies (Spring 
2001), 60.
 
66.
 
Simon Reynolds, Generation Ecstasy: Into the World of 
Techno and Rave Culture (New York: Routledge, 1999), 60.
 
67.
 
Ethan Smith, “Organization Moby,” Wired, May 
2002, 91.
 
68.
 
Paul Théberge, Any Sound You Can Imagine: Mak-
ing Music/Consuming Technology (Hanover, NH: Wes-
leyan University Press, 1997), 191.
 
69.
 
Joseph Schloss discusses the importance of “dig-
ging in the crates,” in Making Beats: The Art of Sample-Based Hip Hop  (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University 
Press, 2004), 79–100.
 
70.
 
See Aram Sinnreich, Mashed Up: Music, Technology, 
and the Rise of Configurable Culture (Amherst, MA: Uni-
versity of Massachusetts Press, 2010), 121–122, for a discussion of the “bedroom” as a site of music production in the digital era.
 
71.
 
Lauren Gitlin, “DJ Makes Jay-Z Meet Bea-
tles,” Rolling Stone, 5 February 2004. http://
www.rollingstone.com/music/news/dj-makes-jay-z-meet-beatles-20040205. Ben Greenman, “The Mouse That Remixed,” The New Yorker, 9 February 2004. http://www.newyorker.com/archive/2004/02/09/040209ta_talk_greenman.
 
72.
 
The original announcement can be found at 
the Downhill Battle website, http://downhillbattle.org/?m=200402&paged=2. Retrieved 28 February 2012.
 
73.
 
Bill Werde, “Defiant Downloads Rise from Un-
derground,” New York Times, 25 February 2004. 
http://www.nytimes.com/2004/02/25/arts/defiant-downloads-rise-from-underground.html. Rob Walker, “The Grey Album,” New York Times Magazine, 21 March 2004. http://www.nytimes.com/2004/03/21/magazine/21CONSUMED.html.
 
74.
 
Kembrew McLeod and Peter DiCola, Creative Li-
cense: The Law and Culture of Digital Sampling  (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2011), 180.
 
75.
 
Sean Fennessey, “Girl Talk: Night Ripper,” Pitch-
fork, 17 July 2006.
 
76.
 
For background on Illegal Art and its founder, the 
pseudonymous Philo T. Farnsworth, see Kot, Ripped, 163–165.
 
77.
 
Found on the Girl Talk page of the Illegal Art 
website, http://illegal-art.net/girltalk. Retrieved 3 March 2012.
 
78.
 
Kot, Ripped, 170.
 
79.
 
Jacob Ganz, “Music in Advertising: Diplo vs. 
Blackberry,” The Record , 19 October 2010. http://www.
npr.org/blogs/therecord/2010/10/19/130667258/
diplo-vs-blackberry.490  ROCKIN ’ OUT 80.  Kerri Mason, “Let the Beat Build (and Build, and 
Build),” Billboard, 19 May 2012, 19.
 
81.
 
Kerri Mason, “Dance Dance Evolution,” Billboard, 
11 February 2012, 16.
 
82.
 
Ibid.
 
83.
 
Carl Loben, “Top 100 DJs: No. 1, David Guetta,” 
DJ Mag, 2011. http://www.djmag.com/top100/detail  
/2687/1. Retrieved 27 June 2012.
 
84.
 
Kerri Mason, “The Beat Generation,” Billboard, 17 
December 2011, 20–21.
 
85.
 
Jonah Weiner, “From Deadmau5 to Your House,” 
Rolling Stone, 17 February 2011, 48.
 
86.
 
Josh Eells, “The Rise of the Mau5,” Rolling Stone, 
5–19 July 2012, 48.
 
87.
 
Mason, “The Beat Generation,” 21.
 
88.
 
“The MySpace Generation,” BusinessWeek, 12 De-
cember 2005. http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/
content/05_50/b3963001.htm.
 
89.
 
“50 Top Tweeters in Music,” Rolling Stone, 21 
January 2011. http://www.rollingstone.com/music/lists/50-top-tweeters-in-music-20110121.
 
90.
 
Bill Carter, “How a Hit Almost Failed Its Own Au-
dition,” New York Times, 30 April 2006, 1.
 
91.
 
Paul R. La Monica, “No False ‘Idol’ for Fox,” 
CNNMoney.com, 24 May 2006. http://money.cnn.com/2006/05/22/news/companies/idol_fox/index.htm.
 
92.
 
Katherine Meizel, Idolized: Music, Media and Iden-
tity in American Idol (Bloomington, IN: Indiana Univer-sity Press, 2010), 8–9.
 
93.
 
“American Idol’s All-Time Top 24,” Billboard, 28 
February 2012. http://www.Billboard.comfeatures/top-24-american-idols-of-all-time-1004088662.story#/features/top-24-american-idols-of-all-time-1004088662.story.
 
94.
 
Kiri Miller, Playing Along: Digital Games, YouTube, 
and Virtual Performance (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012), 183–184.
 
95.
 
Steve Knopper, “Digital Music’s Unlikely King,” 
Rolling Stone, 31 March 2011, 17–18.
 
96.
 
Kot, Ripped, 214–215.
 
97.
 
Vanessa Grigoriadis, “The Adventures of Super 
Boy,” Rolling Stone, 3 March 2011, 55–56.
 
98.
 
Dan Schawbel, “Inside the Brand of Justin Bieber: 
An Interview with Manager Scooter Braun,” Forbes , 
11 February 2011. http://www.forbes.com/sites/dan-schawbel/2011/02/11/inside-the-brand-of-justin-bieber-an-interview-with-manager-scooter-braun.
 
99.
 
Edmund Lee, “What’s the Most Popular Channel 
on YouTube?,” Ad Age, 16 August 2011. http://adage.
com/article/digital/popular-channel-youtube/229281.  100.  Charles M. Blow, “Swan Songs?” New York Times, 
1 August 2009. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/08/01/
opinion/01blow.html.
 
101.
 
Ray Waddell, “Burning Up the Road: Both Dollars 
and Attendance Prove Touring Is out of Its Slump,” Bill-
board, 23 December 2006, YE-8.
 
102.
 
Ibid.
 
103.
 
Foege, Right of the Dial, 173–178.
 
104.
 
Dean Budnick and Josh Baron, Ticket Masters: The 
Rise of the Concert Industry and How the Public Got Scalped (Toronto: ECW , 2011), 309–310.
 
105.
 
Ray Waddell, “The Rules of the Road: In Uncer-
tain Times, the Live Music Business Posted a Strong 
2008,” Billboard, 20 December 2008, 50.
 
106.
 
Steve Knopper, “Concert Biz Collapses as Fans 
Flee,” Rolling Stone, 20 January 2011, 20.
 
107.
 
Brett DiCrescenzo, review of Radiohead, Kid 
A, Pitchfork, 2 October 2000. http://pitchfork.com/
reviews/albums/6656-kid-a.
 
108.
 
Josh Tryangiel, “Radio Says: Pay What You 
Want,” Time, 1 October 2007. http://www.time.com/
time/arts/article/0,8599,1666973,00.html.
 
109.
 
Kot, Ripped, 238.
 
110.
 
Paul McGuinness, “How to Save the Music In-
dustry,” British GQ, 13 August 2010. http://www.gq-
magazine.co.uk/entertainment/articles/2010-08/13/gq-music-paul-mcguinness-on-music-piracy.
 
111.
 
Jon Caraminica, “For Some, Free Music Is an In-
vestment That Pays Off,” New York Times, 18 November 2011. http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/19/arts/mu-sic/for-mac-miller-wale-and-j-cole-free-music-pays-off.html?pagewanted=all.
 
112.
 
Laurie Segall, “Digital Music Sales Top Physical 
Sales,” CNN Money, 5 January 2012. http://money.cnn.
com/2012/01/05/technology/digital_music_sales/in-dex.htm.
 
113.
 
Cortney Harding, “Bigger Bytes: Indies Experi-
enced Accelerated Growth in ’07,” Billboard, 22 Decem-ber 2007, 38.
 
114.
 
Chris Anderson, “The Long Tail,” Wired, October 
2004. http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/12.10/tail.html.
 
115.
 
Ibid.
 
116.
 
Ibid.
 
117.
 
Steven Levy, “Facebook, Spotify, and the Future of 
Music,” Wired, November 2011. http://www.wired.com/
magazine/2011/10/ff_music.
 
118.
 
Anahid Kassabian, “Ubiquitous Listening,” in Pop -
ular Music Studies , ed. David Hesmondhalgh and Keith 
Negus (London: Arnold, 2002), 131–142.Bibliography
“50 Top Tweeters in Music.” Rolling Stone (21 Janu-
ary 2011). http://www.rollingstone.com/music/
lists/50-top-tweeters-in-music-20110121.
“500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Beach Boys, Pet  
Sounds.” Rolling Stone. http://www.rollingstone.com/  
music/lists/500-greatest-albums-of-all-time-20120531/  
the-beach-boys-pet-sounds-19691231.
Aaron, Charles. “What the White Boy Means When He 
Says Yo.” In Raquel Cepeda, ed., And It Don’t Stop: 
The Best American Hip-Hop Journalism of the Last 25 Years. New York: Faber and Faber, 2004.
Abbott, Lynn, and Doug Seroff. “‘They Cert’ly Sound 
Good to Me’: Sheet Music, Southern Vaudeville, and the Commercial Ascendancy of the Blues.” In David 
Evans, ed., Ramblin’ on My Mind: New Perspectives on the Blues. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2008.
Ackerman, Paul. “Gortikov Scorches Whitey Trade in 
NAFTRA Speech.” Billboard (17 July 1969).
Aletti, Vince. The Disco Files, 1973–1978: New York’s Un-
derground, Week by Week. London: DJhistory.com, 2009.
Alexander, David. “Giving the Devil More Than His 
Due.” The Humanist (March–April 1990).
Allen, Harry. “Hip Hop Madness: From Def Jams to Cold 
Lampin’, Rap Is Our Music.” Essence (April 1989).
“American Idol’s All-Time Top 24.” Billboard (28 Febru-
ary 2012). http://www.billboard.com/features/top-24-american-idols-of-all-time-1004088662.story#/features/top-24-american-idols-of-all-time-1004088662.story. 
“ American Revolution 1969.” Rolling Stone (5 April 1969): 
special insert.
Anderman, Joan. “Dixie Chicks: A Brief History of an Out-
spoken Band.” Boston Globe (28 July 2006). http://www.boston.com/news/globe/living/articles/ 2006/07/28/dixie_chicks_a_brief_history_of_an_outspoken_band/.
———. “The Female Fans Say They’re in It for the 
 
Catharsis.” Boston Globe (16 July 2000).
———. “Hip-Hop Setting the Beat.” Boston Globe (4 October  
2003). http://www.boston.com/news/local/articles/  
2003/10/04/hip_hop_setting_the_beat/.
———. “Shut Up.” Boston Globe (3 December 2000).
Anderson, Chris. “The Long Tail.” Wired (October 2004). 
http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/12.10/tail.html.Ansen, David. “Rock Tycoon.” Newsweek (31 July 1978).
Archer, Gleason L. History of Radio to 1926. New York: 
American Historical Society, 1938.
Arnold, Gina. Kiss This: Punk in the Present Tense. London: 
Pan Books, 1998.
———. Route 666: The Road to Nirvana. New York:  
St. Martin’s Press, 1993.
“ ASCAP Defied.” Business Week (16 November 1940).
Auslander, Philip. Performing Glam Rock: Gender and The-
atricality in Popular Music. Ann Arbor, MI: Univer-
sity of Michigan Press, 2006.
Azerrad, Michael. Our Band Could Be Your Life: Scenes 
from the American Indie Underground. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 2001.
Badger, Reid. A Life in Ragtime: A Biography of James Reese 
Europe. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Bangs, Lester. Psychotic Reactions and Carburetor Dung, ed. 
Greil Marcus. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1987.
———. “The White Noise Supremacists.” Village Voice 
(30 April 1979).
Barlow, William. “Cashing In.” In Jannette L. Dates and 
William Barlow, eds., Split Image: African Americans 
in the Mass Media, 2d ed. Washington, D.C.: Howard 
University Press, 1993.
Barnouw, Erik. The Golden Web: A History of Broadcasting 
in the United States, 1933–1953. New York: Oxford University Press, 1968.
Belz, Carl. The Story of Rock, 2d ed. New York: Harper 
Colophon, 1971.
Bennett, Tony, Simon Frith, Lawrence Grossberg, John 
Shepard, and Graeme Turner, eds. Rock and Popular Music: Politics, Policies, Institutions. New York: Rout-ledge, 1993.
Berry, Chuck. The Autobiography. New York: Harmony, 
1987.
Berry, Robert J. “Satanism: The Law Enforcement Re-
sponse.” The National Sheriff (February–March 
1987).
Biafra, Jello. “The Far Right and the Censorship of  
Music.” Harvard Law Record (17 April 1987).
Binelli, Mark. “The Accidental Superstar.” Rolling Stone 
(18 March 2004).
“The Birth of Our Popular Songs.” Literary Digest  
(7 
 
October 1916).
Blecha, Peter. Sonic Boom: The History of Northwest Rock, 
from “Louie Louie” to “Smells Like Teen Spirit.” New York: Backbeat Books, 2009.
  491492  ROCKIN ’ OUTBloomberg News. “FTC Slams Record Labels on CD 
Sales Practice” (10 May 2000). http://news.cnet.
com/2100-1023-240383.html.
Blow, Charles M. “Swan Songs?” New York Times  
(1 August 2009). http://www.nytimes.com/2009/ 
08/01/opinion/01blow.html.
Blush, Steven. American Hardcore: A Tribal History, 2d ed. 
Los Angeles: Feral House, 2010.
Bondi, Vic. “Feeding Noise Back into the System: Hard-
core, Hip Hop, and Heavy Metal.” Paper presented at the New England American Studies Association Conference, Brandeis University, Boston, MA, 1 May 1993.
Booth, Stanley. The True Adventures of the Rolling Stones. 
New York: Vintage Books, 1985.
Borland, John. “Judge: File-Swapping Tools Are Legal.” 
CNET News.com (25 April 2003). http://news.com.
com/2100-1027-998363.html.
———. “Napster Lawyer Turns Antitrust Experience 
on RIAA.” CNET News.com (20 July 2000). http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1005-200-2295301.html.
———. “Napster Says 30,000 Metallica Fans Appeal 
Ban.” CNET (16 May 2000). http://news.cnet.com/Napster-says-30,000-Metallica-fans-appeal-ban/2100-1023_3-240611.html.
———. “Tech Giants Slam Napster Injunction.” CNET 
News.com (25 August 2000). http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1005-200-2612001.html.
———. “U.S. Sides with RIAA Against Napster.” CNET 
News.com (8 September 2000). http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1005-200-2731198.html.
Bowman, Rob. “The Stax Sound: A Musicological Analy-
sis.” Popular Music (October 1995).
Bozza, Anthony. “NSynchronicity.” Rolling Stone (30 
March 2000).
Brack, Ray. “James Brown.” Rolling Stone (21 January 1970).Brackett, David. “The Politics and Practice of ‘Crossover’ 
in American Popular Music, 1963 to 1965.” The Mu-sical Quarterly (Winter 1994).
Brant, Marley. Join Together: Forty Years of the Rock Music 
Festival. New York: Backbeat Books, 2008.
Bray, Hiawatha. “Hackers Go One Up.” Boston Globe (26 
October 2000).
Breihan, Tom. “Lil Wayne: Best Rapper Ever?” Village 
Voice (19 October 2005). http://blogs.villagevoice.com/statusainthood/2005/10/lil_wayne_best.php.
Breskin, David. “Bob Geldof: The Rolling Stone Inter-
view.” Rolling Stone (5 December 1985).
Bricker, Rebecca. “Take One.” People (4 April 1983).
Bromell, Nick. Tomorrow Never Knows: Rock and Psyche-
delics in the 1960s. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.
Brooks, Tim. Lost Sounds: Blacks and the Birth of the 
 
Recording Industry, 1890–1919. Urbana, IL: University 
of Illinois Press, 2004.Broven, John. Rhythm and Blues in New Orleans. Gretna, 
LA: Pelican Publishing Co., 1988.
Brown, James, with Bruce Tucker. James Brown: The God-
father of Soul. London: Fontana Books, 1988.
Brown, Janelle. “Crack SDMI? No Thanks!” Salon.com 
(14 September 2000). http://www.salon.com/tech/
log/2000/09/14/hack_sdmi/index.html.
Browne, David. “Turn That @#!% Down: The Complete 
Idiot’s Guide to the Future of Rock & Roll.” Enter -
tainment Weekly (21 August 1992).
Bry, David. “The Song of the South.” Vibe (June 2002).
Budnick, Dean, and Josh Baron. Ticket Masters: The Rise 
of the Concert Industry and How the Public Got Scalped. Toronto: ECW , 2011.
Cantwell, Robert. When We Were Good: The Folk Revival. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996.
Caramanica, Jon. “For Some, Free Music Is an Invest-
ment That Pays Off.” New York Times (18 Novem-
ber 2011). http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/19/arts/music/for-mac-miller-wale-and-j-cole-free-music-pays-off.html?pagewanted=all.
———. “Grow Dem Bow.” Village Voice (12 January 2006).  
http://www.villagevoice.com/music/0603,caramanica,  
71722,22.html.
———. “ A Singular Influence.” New York Times (30 March  
2012). http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/01/arts/ music/nicki-minaj-is-the-influential-leader-of-hip-hop.html?pagewanted=all.
Carr, Patrick, ed. The Illustrated History of Country Music. 
New York: Random House/Times Books, 1995.
Carr, Tim. “Talk That Talk, Walk That Walk.” Rolling 
Stone (26 May 1983).
Carter, Bill. “How a Hit Almost Failed Its Own Audi-
tion.” New York Times (30 April 2006).
Cateforis, Theo. Are We Not New Wave? Modern Pop at 
the Turn of the 1980s. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 2011.
“To Censor Popular Songs.” Literary Digest (24 May 
1913).
Chambers, Iain. Urban Rhythms: Popular Music and Popu-
lar Culture. New York: Macmillan, 1985.
Chang, Jeff. Can’t Stop Won’t Stop: A History of the Hip-Hop 
Generation. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2005.
———. “Is Protest Music Dead?” CounterPunch (2 April 
2002). http://www.counterpunch.org/changpro-testmusic.html.
Chapple, Steve, and Reebee Garofalo. Rock ‘n’ Roll Is Here 
to Pay: The History and Politics of the Music Industry. Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1977.
Charnas, Dan. The Big Payback: The History of the Busi-
ness of Hip-Hop. New York: New American Library, 2010.
Christgau, Georgia. “Disco! Disco! Disco! Four Crit-
ics Address the Musical Question.” In These Times  
(6–12 June 1979). B IBLIOGRAPHY 493Christgau, Robert. Any Old Way You Choose It: Rock and 
Other Pop Music, 1967–1973. Baltimore: Penguin 
Books, 1973.
———. “ A Cult Explodes—and a Movement Is Born.” 
Village Voice (24 October 1977).
Clarke, Donald, ed. The Penguin Encyclopedia of Popular 
Music. New York: Viking, 1989.
Cleaver, Eldridge. Soul on Ice. New York: McGraw Hill, 
1968.
Cobo, Leila. “Radio Flips for Reggaeton.” Billboard (10 
September 2005).
———. “Reggaeton Broke Out but Regional Mexican 
Acts Drove Latin Biz.” Billboard (24 December 
2005); special section.
———. “Reggaeton Rules.” Billboard (30 July 2005).
Cockrell, Dale. Demons of Disorder: Early Blackface 
 
Minstrels and Their World. New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 1997.
Cohen, Kenneth, Tom Brown, Jim Gibson, Paul Hofer, 
Vanessa Locke, Sharon Long, Cynthia Matthews, and Courtney Semisch. “No Electronic Theft Act: Policy Development Team Report.” Washington, D.C.: United States Sentencing Commission (Febru-ary 1999).
Cohen, Rich. “Southern Comfort.” Rolling Stone (10 
 
August 1995).
Coleman, Mark. “The Revival of Conscience.” Rolling 
Stone (15 November 1990).
Coleman, Rick. Blue Monday: Fats Domino and the Lost 
Dawn of Rock ‘n’ Roll. Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press, 2006.
Collin, Matthew. Altered States: The Story of Ecstasy Culture 
and Acid House. New York: Serpent’s Tail, 1997.
Considine, J. D. “Led Zeppelin.” Rolling Stone (20 Septem-
ber 1990).
———. “Metal Mania.” Rolling Stone (15 November 
1990).
Conway, Cecelia. African Banjo Echoes in Applachia: A 
Study of Folk Traditions. Knoxville, TN: University of Tennessee Press, 1995.
Cotts, Cynthia. “Telecom for Dummies.” Village Voice 
(5–11 September 2001). http://www.villagevoice.com/2001-09-04/news/telecom-for-dummies/.
Cripps, Thomas. “Film.” In Jannette L. Dates and Wil-
liam Barlow, eds., Split Image: African Americans in the Mass Media, 2d ed. Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press, 1993.
Cross, Brian. It’s Not About a Salary: Rap, Race and Resis-
tance in Los Angeles. New York: Verso, 1993.
Cross, Charles. Heavier Than Heaven: A Biography of Kurt 
Cobain. New York: Hyperion, 2001.
Cummings, Sue. “Road Warriors.” Spin (August 1986).
Davey D., “Boots Speaks Out About 9/11.” Davey D’s Hip Hop 
Corner (20 September 2001). http://www.daveyd.com/  
bootsonthewarpolitics.html.Daly, Steven. “Britney Spears: Inside the Heart and Mind 
(and Bedroom) of America’s New Teen Queen.” 
Rolling Stone (15 April 1999).
Danielsen, Anne. Presence and Pleasure: The Funk Grooves 
of James Brown and Parliament. Middletown, CT: 
Wesleyan University Press, 2006.
Dates, Jannette L., and William Barlow, eds. Split Image: 
African Americans in the Mass Media, 2d ed. Washing-ton, D.C.: Howard University Press, 1993.
Dawson, Jim, and Steve Propes. What Was the First Rock 
‘n’ Roll Record? Boston: Faber and Faber, 1992.
DeCurtis, Anthony. “The Eagles.” Rolling Stone (20 Sep-
tember 1990).
———. “Kurt Cobain, 1967–1994.” Rolling Stone (2 June 
1994).
———. “Ropin’ the Whirl Wind.” Rolling Stone (1 April 
1993).
———. “The Year in Music.” Rolling Stone (10–24 De-
cember 1992).
DeCurtis, Anthony, and James Henke, eds. The Rolling 
Stone Illustrated History of Rock & Roll. New York: 
Random House, 1992.
De Forest, Lee. Father of Radio. Chicago: Wilcox and  
Follett, 1950.
Denisoff, R. Serge, and Richard A. Peterson, eds. The 
Sounds of Social Change: Studies in Popular Culture. New York: Rand McNally, 1972.
Denselow, Robin. When the Music’s Over: The Story of 
 
Political Pop. Boston: Faber and Faber, 1989.
Dexter, Dave. “1935–1945, Disk Jockey: Origin of the 
Species.” Billboard (27 December 1969).
DiCrescenzo, Brett. Review of Radiohead, Kid A. Pitchfork 
(2 October 2000). http://pitchfork.com/reviews/ albums/6656-kid-a.
Diehl, Matt. My So-Called Punk: Green Day, Fall Out Boy, 
The Distillers, Bad Religion—How Neo-Punk Stage Dived into the Mainstream. New York: St. Martin’s, 2007.
Doherty, Thomas. Teenagers and Teenpics: The Juveniliza-
tion of American Movies in the 1950s, rev. ed. Philadel-phia: Temple University Press, 2002.
Dombai, Ryan. Review of Drake, Thank Me Later. Pitch-
fork (15 June 2010). http://pitchfork.com/reviews/
albums/14367-thank-me-later/.
Douglas, Susan. Inventing American Broadcasting, 1899-1922. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1987.
———. Where the Girls Are: Growing Up Female with the 
Mass Media. New York: Times Books, 1995.
Draper, Robert. Rolling Stone Magazine. New York: 
Harper and Row, 1990.
Duncan, Robert. The Noise: Notes from a Rock ‘n’ Roll Era. 
New York: Ticknor & Fields, 1984.
Dyer, Richard. “In Defense of Disco.” In Simon Frith and 
Andrew Goodwin, eds., On Record: Rock, Pop, and the 
Written Word. New York: Vintage, 1990.494  ROCKIN ’ OUTDylan, Bob. Chronicles, Volume One. New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 2004.
Echols, Alice. Daring to Be Bad: Radical Feminism in 
America, 1967–1975. Minneapolis, MN: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1989.
———. Hot Stuff: Disco and the Remaking of American Cul-
ture. New York: W .W . Norton & Company, 2010.
Eells, Josh. “The Rise of the Mau5.” Rolling Stone (5–19 
July 2012).
Eisen, Jonathan, ed. The Age of Rock. New York: Vintage 
Books, 1969.
———, ed. The Age of Rock 2: Sights and Sounds of the Ameri-
can Cultural Revolution. New York: Vintage Books, 1970.
Elavsky, C. Michael. “United as ONE: Live 8 and the Pol-
itics of the Global Music Media Spectacle.” Journal 
of Popular Music Studies (December 2009).
Eliscu, Jenny. “Chicks Triumph.” Rolling Stone (29 May 
2003).
Emerson, Ken. Doo-dah! Stephen Foster and the Rise of Ameri-
can Popular Culture. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997.
Ennis, Philip. The Seventh Stream: The Emergence of Rock 
‘n’ Roll in American Popular Music. Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University Press/University Press of New England, 1992.
Epstein, Dena. Sinful Tunes and Spirituals: Black Folk Mu-
sic to the Civil War. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2003.
Erlewine, Michael, et al., eds. All Music Guide to Rock. San 
Francisco: Miller Freeman Books, 1997.
Farrar, Richard. “Da Doo Ron Ron.” Rolling Stone  
(11 May 1968).
Fast, Susan. In the Houses of the Holy: Led Zeppelin and the 
Power of Rock Music. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Feld, Steven. “Notes on World Beat.” Public Culture 
 
Bulletin (Fall 1988).
Felder, Rachel. Manic Pop Thrill. Hopewell, NJ: Echo 
Press, 1993.
Fellezs, Kevin. Birds of Fire: Jazz, Rock, Funk, and the 
Creation of Fusion. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011.
Fennessey, Sean. Review of Girl Talk, Night Ripper. 
Pitchfork (17 July 2006).
Fikentscher, Kai. You Better Work: Underground Dance 
Music in New York City. Hanover, NH: University Press of New England, 2000.
Fisher, William. “Theories of Intellectual Property.” In 
Stephen Munzer, ed., New Essays in the Legal and Political Theory of Property. Cambridge University Press, 2001. http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/people/tfisher/iptheory.pdf.
Flick, Larry. “Declining Sales in 2002 Trigger Desire for 
Less Hype, Better Records, Fresh Blood.” Billboard (28 December 2002).Flipside, Al. “Lollapalooza.” Flipside (September–October  
1991).
Flores, Juan. From Bomba to Hip Hop: Puerto Rican Culture 
and Latino Identity. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2000.
Foege, Alec. Right of the Dial: The Rise of Clear Channel 
and the Fall of Commercial Radio. New York: Faber 
and Faber, 2008.
Fong-Torres, Ben, ed. The Rolling Stone Interviews. 2 vols. 
New York: Warner Books, 1973.
———. “The Rolling Stone Interview: Ray Charles.” 
Rolling Stone (18 January 1973).
Forman, Murray. “‘Represent’: Race, Space and Place in 
Rap Music.” Popular Music (January 2000).
———. “Soundtrack to a Crisis: Music, Context, Dis-
course.” Television and New Media (May 2002).
Fox, Ted. In the Groove. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 
1986.
———. Showtime at the Apollo. New York: Holt, Rinehart 
and Winston, 1983.
Frank, Thomas. The Conquest of Cool: Business Culture, 
Counterculture, and the Rise of Hip Consumerism. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1997.
Fricke, David. “Imagine.” Rolling Stone (27 December 
2001–3 January 2002).
———. “Kurt Cobain.” Rolling Stone (27 January 1994).
———. “Lollapalooza.” Rolling Stone (19 September 
1991).
———. “Red Hot Chili Peppers’ Naked Truth.” Rolling 
Stone (25 June 1992).
Frith, Simon. “Beyond the Dole Queue: The Politics of 
Punk.” Village Voice (24 October 1977).
———. “Crappy Birthday to Punk.” In These Times  
(23–29 April 1986).
———, ed. Facing the Music. New York: Pantheon Books, 
1988.
———. Performing Rites: On the V alue of Popular Music. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996. 
———. Sound Effects: Youth, Leisure and the Politics of 
Rock ‘n’ Roll. New York: Pantheon Books, 1981.
Frith, Simon, and Andrew Goodwin, eds. On Record: 
Rock, Pop, and the Written Word. New York: Pantheon Books, 1990.
Frith, Simon, and Howard Horne. Art into Pop. New 
York: Methuen, 1987.
Frith, Simon, and John Street. “Party Music.” Marxism 
Today (June 1986).
Gaar, Gillian G. She’s a Rebel: The History of Women in 
Rock & Roll. Seattle: Seal Press, 1992.
Gain, Bruce. “RIAA Takes Shotgun to Traders.” Wired 
News (4 October 2005), http://www.wired.com/news/digiwood/0,1412,68951,00.html.
Gaines, Donna. “Suicidal Tendencies: Kurt Did Not Die 
for You.” Rolling Stone (2 June 1994). B IBLIOGRAPHY 495———. Teenage Wasteland: Suburbia’s Dead End Kids. 
New York: Pantheon, 1991.
Ganz, Jacob. “Music in Advertising: Diplo vs. Blackberry.” 
The Record (19 October 2010). http://www.npr.
org/blogs/therecord/2010/10/19/130667258/
diplo-vs-blackberry.
Garofalo, Reebee. “Crossing Over, 1939–1992.” In Jan-
nette L. Dates and William Barlow, eds. Split Image: African Americans in the Mass Media, 2d ed. Washing-ton, D.C.: Howard University Press, 1993.
———. “The Impact of the Civil Rights Movement on 
Popular Music.” Radical America. March 1989.
———. “I Want My MP3: Who Owns Internet  
Music?” In Martin Cloonan and Reebee Garofalo, 
eds., 
 
Policing Pop. Philadelphia: Temple University 
Press, 2003.
———. “Nelson Mandela, the Concert: Mass Culture as 
a Contested Terrain.” In Mark O’Brien and Craig Little, eds., Reimaging America: The Arts of Social Change. Philadelphia: New Society Publishers, 1990.
———. “Pop Goes to War, 2001–2004: U.S. Popular Mu-
sic After 9/11.” In J. Martin Daughtry and Jonathan Ritter, eds., Music in the Post-9/11 World. New York: Routledge, 2007.
———, ed. Rockin’ the Boat: Mass Music and Mass Move-
ments. Boston: South End Press, 1992.
———. “Setting the Record Straight: Censorship and 
Social Responsibility in Popular Music.” Journal of Popular Music Studies, Vol. 6 (1994).
———. “Understanding Mega-Events: If We Are the 
World, Then How Do We Change It?” In Constance Penley and Andrew Ross, eds.,Technoculture. Minne-apolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1991.
Garrity, Brian. “ Anticipated Boom Was a Bust.” Billboard 
(24 December 2005).
———. “Grokster Blasts RIAA Anti-Piracy Tactics.” 
BillBoard.com (27 June 2003). Posted on FreeRe-public.com. http://209.157.64.200/focus/f-news/ 936821/posts.
———. “Music Biz Gets a Makeover.” Billboard (25   
December 2004).
Gendron, Bernard. Between Montmartre and the Mudd 
Club: Popular Music and the Avant-Garde. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002.
George, Nelson. Buppies, B-Boys, Baps and Bohos: Notes on 
Post-Soul Black Culture. New York: HarperCollins, 1992.
———. The Death of Rhythm & Blues. New York:  
Pantheon Books, 1988.
Gett, Steve. “Rock ’86.” Billboard (27 December 1986).
Gilbert, James. A Cycle of Outrage: America’s Reaction to the 
Juvenile Delinquent in the 1950s. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986.
Gillen, Marilyn. “The Year in Business: Ups, Downs, and 
Rebounds.” Billboard (27 December 1999).Gillett, Charlie. The Sound of the City: The Rise of Rock and 
Roll. New York: Outerbridge and Dienstfrey, 1970.
Gilmore, Mikal. “Disco.” Rolling Stone (19 April 1979).
———. “The Year in Music.” Rolling Stone (13–27 De-
cember 1990).
Gitlin, Lauren. “DJ Makes Jay-Z Meet Beatles.” Rolling Stone  
(5 February 2004). http://www.rollingstone.com/  
music/news/dj-makes-jay-z-meet-beatles-20040205.
Gitlin, Todd, The Sixties: Years of Hope, Days of Rage. New 
York: Bantam Books, 1993.
Glasser, Ruth. My Music Is My Flag: Puerto Rican Musi-
cians and Their New York Communities, 1917–1940. 
Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1995. 
Gleason, Ralph. “Perspectives: Changing with the Money 
Changers.” Rolling Stone (20 January 1968).
———. “Stop This Shuck Mike Bloomfield.” Rolling 
Stone (11 May 1968).
Goldberg, Michael. “Bill Graham: The Rolling Stone In-
terview.” Rolling Stone (19 December 1985).
———. “The Spending Begins.” Rolling Stone (24 Octo-
ber 1985).
Goodman, Fred. “Big Deals: How Money Fever Is Chang-
ing the Music Business.” Musician (January 1992).
———. “Will Rock Trounce Teen Pop?” Rolling Stone 
(28 February 2002).
Goodwin, Andrew. Dancing in the Distraction Factory: Mu-
sic Television and Popular Culture. Minneapolis, MN: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1992.
Gottlieb, Joanne, and Gayle Wald. “Smells Like Teen 
Spirit: Riot Grrrls, Revolution and Women in In-dependent Rock.” In Andrew Ross and Tricia Rose, eds., Microphone Fiends: Youth Music and Youth Cul-
ture. New York: Routledge, 1994.
Graham, Renée. “Is Some Hatred More Acceptable Than 
Others?” Boston Globe (5 January 2001).
Grandmaster Flash with David Ritz. The Adventures of 
Grandmaster Flash: My Life, My Beats. New York: Harlem Moon, 2008.
Graustark, Barbara. “Disco Takes Over.” Newsweek (2 
April 1979).
Gray, Herman. “Popular Music as a Social Problem: A 
Social History of Claims Against Popular Music.” In Joel Best, ed., Images of Issues. Hawthorne, NY: De Gruyter, 1989.
———. “Rate the Records: Symbolic Conflict, Popular  
Music, and Social Problems.” Popular Music and 
 
Society (Fall 1989).
Green, Heather. “Does She Look Like a Music  
Pirate?” Business Week (5 May 2008). http://www.
businessweek.com/magazine/content/08_18/b4082042959954.htm.
Green, Tony. “The Dirty South.” In The VIBE History of 
Hip Hop, ed. Alan Light. New York: Three Rivers Press, 1999.496  ROCKIN ’ OUTGreenman, Ben. “The Mouse That Remixed.” The New 
Yorker (9 February 2004). http://www.newyorker.
com/archive/2004/02/09/040209ta_talk_greenman.
Grein, Paul. “ AOR Programmers Plan More Variety.” 
Billboard (14 January 1984).
———. “Charts ’86.” Billboard (27 December 1986).
———. “’83 RIAA Tally: Fewer Biggies.” Billboard (14 
January 1984).
———. “Unemployment Lines: LA Industrial Personnel 
Face Major Challenges to Rebuild Their Careers.” 
Billboard (19 May 1979).
———. “The Year in Charts.” Billboard (26 December 
1987).
Grigoriadis, Vanessa. “The Adventures of Super Boy.” 
Rolling Stone (3 March 2011).
Grossberg, Lawrence. “The Framing of Rock: Rock and 
the New Conservatism.” In Tony Bennett et al., eds., 
Rock and Popular Music: Politics, Policies, Institutions. New York: Routledge, 1993.
———. We Gotta Get Out of This Place: Popular Conserva-
tism and Postmodern Culture. New York: Routledge, 1992.
Grossman, Jay. “Let There Be Dancing in the Streets.” 
Rolling Stone (23 May 1974).
Gundersen, Edna. “For Springsteen, ‘Seeger Sessions’ 
Sends a Message.” USA Today (7 June 2006).
Guralnick, Peter. Feel Like Going Home: Portraits in Blues 
and Rock ‘n’ Roll. New York: E.P . Dutton, 1971.
———. Last Train to Memphis: The Rise of Elvis Presley. 
Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1994.
———. The Listener’s Guide to the Blues. New York: Facts 
on File, 1982.
———. Sweet Soul Music: Rhythm and Blues and the Southern 
Dream of Freedom. New York: Harper and Row, 1986.
Gurza, Agustin. “The Reggaeton Craze Saw a Quick 
Burnout with Fans and Radio.” Los Angeles Times (19 April 2006). http://www.chicagotribune.com/ features/lifestyle/chi-0604190022apr19,1,3467652.story?coll=chi-leisuretempo-hed&ctrack=1&cset=true.
Gushee, Lawrence. Pioneeers of Jazz: The Story of the Cre-
ole Band. New York: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Guzman, Pablo. “On the Radio, Part Two.” Rock & Roll 
Confidential (January 1984).
Hager, Steven. Hip Hop: The Illustrated History of Break 
Dancing, Rap Music, and Graffiti. New York: St. Mar-tin’s Press, 1984.
Hamill, Pete. “ A Day to Remember.” Rolling Stone (29 Au-
gust 1985).
Hamm, Charles. Yesterdays: Popular Song in America. New 
York: W .W . Norton, 1983.
Hammond, John. On Record. New York: Penguin Books, 
1981.
Harding, Cortney. “Bigger Bytes: Indies Experienced Accel-
erated Growth in ’07,” Billboard (22 December 2007). Harmon, Amy. “Music Industry in Global Fight on 
Web Copies.” New York Times (7 October 2002).  
http://www.nytimes.com/2002/10/07/technology/  
07SWAP .html.
Harrington, Richard. “Charting SoundScan’s Shake-up.” 
Washington Post (19 June 1991).
Harris, Charles K. After the Ball: Forty Years of Melody, 
An Autobiography. New York: Frank-Maurice, Inc., 
1926.
Harris, Ron. “Metallica to Napster: Cut Users.” Boston 
Globe (4 May 2000).
Harrison, Daphne Duval. Black Pearls: Blues Queens of 
the 1920s. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1988.
Heath, Chris. “Creed’s Stairway to Heaven.” Rolling Stone 
(28 February 2002).
———. “The Epic Life of Carlos Santana.” Rolling Stone 
(16 March 2000).
———. “Has Anyone Seen Christina?” Rolling Stone  
(14 November 2001).
Hebdige, Dick. Subculture: The Meaning of Style. London: 
Routledge, 1979.
Heilbut, Tony. The Gospel Sound: Good News and Bad 
Times. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1971.
Heilemann, John. “David Boies: The Wired Interview.” 
Wired (October 2000). http://www.wired.com/
wired/archive/8.10/boies_pr.html.
Heins, Marjorie. Sex, Sin, and Blasphemy: A Guide to 
 
America’s Censorship Wars. New York: The New Press, 1993.
Hemphill, Paul. The Nashville Sound: Bright Lights and 
Country Music. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1970.
Henderson, Alex. “ Active Indies.” Billboard (24 December 
1988).
Henke, James. “Record Companies Dancing to a Billion 
Dollar Tune.” Rolling Stone (19 April 1979).
Hersey, Gerri. Nowhere to Run: The Story of Soul Music. 
New York: Penguin Books, 1984.
Heylin, Clinton. From the Velvets to the Voidoids: A Pre-
Punk History for a Post-Punk World. New York: Pen-guin Books, 1993.
Hilburn, Robert. “Musical Lessons from 1983’s First 
Half.” Cape Cod Times (16 July 1983).
Hill, Trent. “The Enemy Within: Censorship in Rock 
Music in the 1950s.” South Atlantic Quarterly (Fall 1991).
Hilmes, Michelle. Only Connect: A Cultural History of 
Broadcasting in the United States, 3d ed. Boston: Wad-sworth, 2010. 
“The Hip-Hop 50.” Rolling Stone (29 October 1998).
Holden, Stephen. “The Evolution of a Dance Craze.” 
Rolling Stone (19 April 1979).
———. “Musical Odyssey.” New York Times (9 December 
1987). B IBLIOGRAPHY 497———. “Pop Records Turn to Hip Hop.” New York Times 
(23 September 1984).
Holland, Bill. “Senate Hearing Examines Gangsta 
 
Lyrics.” Billboard (5 March 1994).
Holloway, Joseph E., ed. Africanisms in American Culture. 
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1990.
Hoskyns, Barney. Waiting for the Sun: Strange Days, Weird 
Scenes and the Sound of Los Angeles. New York:  
St. Martin’s Press, 1996.
Hu, Jim. “Web, Music Giants March to Different Tunes.” 
CNET News.com (13 July 2001). http://news.cnet.
com/news/0-1005-200-6561339.html.
Huber, Patrick. Linthead Stomp: The Creation of Country 
Music in the Piedmont South. Chapel Hill, NC: Uni-
versity of North Carolina Press, 2008.
Huffstutter, P . J. “Music Makers at Wits’ End in Battle 
with Internet Takers.” Los Angeles Times (29 May 2000).
Hung, Michèle, and Esteban Garcia Morencos. World 
Record Sales 1969–1990: A Statistical History of the World Recording Industry. London: International Federation of the Phonogram Industry, 1990.
“I Heard the News Today...” Rolling Stone (25 October 
2001).
Jacobs, Norman, ed. Culture for the Millions? Mass Media 
in Modern Society. Princeton, NJ: D. Van Nostrand, 1959.
Jackson, John. Big Beat Heat: Alan Freed and the Early 
Years of Rock & Roll. New York: Schirmer Books, 2000.
Jefferson, Margo. On Michael Jackson. New York:  
Pantheon, 2006.
Johnson, Rick. “Is Heavy Metal Dead? Last Drum Solo 
at the Power Chord Corral.” Creem (October 1980).
Jones, Hettie. Big Star, Fallin’ Mama. New York: Viking 
Press, 1974.
Jones, Kristin V . “Rocking the Hip Hop Vote.” The Nation 
(1 December 2003).
Jones, Leroi [Amiri Baraka]. Blues People. New York: 
William Morrow, 1963.
Jones, Steve. “Ban(ned) in the USA: Popular Music and 
Censorship.” Journal of Communication Inquiry  
(Winter 1991).
Jones, Tim. “Media Giant’s Rally Sponsorship Raises 
Questions.” Chicago Tribune (19 March 2003). 
http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/showcase/  
chi-0303190157mar19.story.
Jones, Vanessa E. “Whose Word Is It Anyway?” Boston 
Globe (7 July 1999).
Kafka, Peter. “The Queen of Teen.” Forbes (20 March 2000).Kahn, Joseph P . “Musical Chairs Coming Up for the 
White House.” Boston Globe (20 January 2001).
Kahn-Harris, Keith. Extreme Metal: Music and Culture on 
the Edge. Oxford, UK: Berg, 2007.Kaplan, E. Ann. Rocking Around the Clock: Music Televi-
sion, Postmodernism, and Consumer Culture. New York: 
Routledge, 1987.
Kassabian, Anahid. “Ubiquitous Listening.” In David 
Hesmondhalgh and Keith Negus, eds., Popular Music 
Studies. London: Arnold, 2002.
Katz, Mark. Capturing Sound: How Technology Has 
Changed Music, rev. ed. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2010.
Kearney, Mary. Girls Make Media. New York: Routledge, 
2006.
Keightley, Keir. “Reconsidering Rock.” In Simon Frith, 
John Street, and Will Straw, eds., The Cambridge Companion to Pop and Rock. Cambridge, UK: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2001.
———. “Taking Popular Music (and Tin Pan Alley and 
Jazz) Seriously.” Journal of Popular Music Studies, Vol. 22 (2010).
Kernfeld, Barry. Pop Song Piracy: Disobedient Music Dis-
tribution since 1929. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011.
Kleinfeld, N. R. “FM’s Success Is Loud and Clear.” New 
York Times (26 October 1979).
Knopper, Steve. Appetite for Self-Destruction: The Spectacu-
lar Crash of the Record Industry in the Digital Age. New York: Free Press, 2009.
———. “Concert Biz Collapses as Fans Flee.” Rolling 
Stone (20 January 2011).
———. “Digital Music’s Unlikely King.” Rolling Stone 
(31 March 2011).
———. “How the Universal-EMI Deal Will Change the 
Music Industry.” Rolling Stone (8 December 2011). 
http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/how-the-universal-emi-deal-will-change-the-music-in-dustry-20111123.
Konrad, Rachel. “Napster Among Fastest-Growing Net 
Technologies.” CNET News.com (5 October 2000). http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1005-200-2938703.html.
Kopkind, Andrew. “The Dialectic of Disco.” Village Voice 
(12 February 1979).
Kot, Greg. Ripped: How the Wired Generation Revolution-
ized Music. New York: Scribner, 2009.
———. “What’s Wrong with Radio.” Rolling Stone  
(16 August 2001).
Kraft, James. Stage to Studio: Musicians and the Sound Rev-
olution, 1890–1950. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Uni-versity Press, 1996.
Krugman, Paul. “Channels of Influence,” New York 
Times (25 March 2003). http://www.nytimes.com/2003/03/25/opinion/25KRUG.html.
Kubernik, Harvey, and Kenneth Kubernik. A Perfect Haze: 
The Illustrated History of the Monterey Pop Festival. Solana Beach, CA: Santa Monica Press, 2011.498  ROCKIN ’ OUTLamb, Bill. “How to Read the Billboard Charts.” About.
com (26 August 2006). http://top40.about.com/od/
popmusic101/a/billboardcharts.htm.
LaMonica, Paul R. “No False “Idol” for Fox.” CNN 
Money.com (24 May 2006). http://money.cnn.com/ 
2006/05/22/news/companies/idol_fox/index.htm.
Landau, Jon. “The Motown Story.” Rolling Stone (13 May 
1971).
———. “Soul.” Rolling Stone (24 February 1968).
Lander, Howard. “ A Letter from the Publisher: Billboard 
Debuts Piece Counts On Two Music Sales Charts.” Billboard (25 May 1991).
Lang, Michael, with Holly George-Warren. The Road to 
Woodstock. New York: Ecco, 2009.
Latonero, Mark. “Survey of MP3 Usage: Report on a Uni-
versity Consumption Community.” The Norman 
Lear Center, Annenberg School for Communication, University of Southern California (June 2000).
Lauterbach, Preston. The Chitlin’ Circuit and the Road to Rock 
‘n’ Roll. New York: W .W . Norton & Company, 2011.
Lawrence, Tim. Love Saves the Day: A History of American 
Dance Music Culture, 1970–1979. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003.
Lax, Roger, and Frederick Smith. The Great Song Thesau-
rus. New York: Oxford University Press, 1989.
Lederman, Minna. “Music and Monopoly.” The Nation 
(28 December 1940).
Lee, Edmund. “What’s the Most Popular Channel on  
YouTube?” Ad Age (16 August 2011). http:// 
adage.com/article/digital/popular-channel-youtube/  
229281.
Leonard, Marion. Gender in the Music Industry: Rock, Dis-
course and Girl Power. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate, 2007.
Levine, Lawrence. Highbrow/Lowbrow: The Emergence of 
Cultural Hierarchy in America. Cambridge, MA: Har-vard University Press, 1988.
Levinson, Nan. “Shut Up.” Boston Globe (20 February 
1994).
Levy, Steven. “ Ad Nauseum: How MTV Sells Out Rock & 
Roll.” Rolling Stone (8 December 1983).
———. “Facebook, Spotify, and the Future of Music.” 
Wired (November 2011). http://www.wired.com/magazine/2011/10/ff_music.
Lewis, Jon. Hollywood vs Hard Core: How the Struggle 
over Censorship Saved the Modern Film Industry. New York: New York University Press, 2000.
Lewis, Lisa. Gender Politics and MTV: Voicing the Differ -
ence. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1990.
Lewis, Randy. “ All-black Top 10 Is a Billboard Hot 
100 First.” Los Angeles Times (9 October 2003). http://articles.latimes.com/2003/oct/09/news/wk-quick9.
Lhamon, Jr., W . T. Jump Jim Crow: Lost Plays, Lyrics, and 
Street Prose of the First Atlantic Popular Culture. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003.Light, Alan. “Ice.” Rolling Stone (20 August 1992).
Linn, Karen. That Half-Barbaric Twang: The Banjo in 
American Popular Culture. Urbana, IL: University of 
Illinois Press, 1991.
Lipsitz, George. Class and Culture in Cold War America: “ A 
Rainbow at Midnight.” South Hadley, MA: J.F . Ber-
gin, 1982.
———. “Creating Dangerously: The Blues Life of 
Johnny Otis.” In Johnny Otis, Upside Your Head! Rhythm and Blues on Central Avenue. Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University Press, 1993.
———. Dangerous Crossroads: Popular Music, Postmodern-
ism and the Poetics of Place. London: Verso, 1994.
———. Time Passages: Collective Memory and American 
Popular Culture. Minneapolis, MN: University of 
Minnesota Press, 1990.
Loben, Carl. “Top 100 DJs: No. 1, David Guetta.” DJ 
Mag (2011). http://www.djmag.com/top100/detail/2687/1.
Lohr, Steve. “Media Mergers: An Urge to Get Bigger and 
More Global.” New York Times (19 March 1989).
Lombardi, John. “Kenny Gamble and Leon Huff and the 
Resurrection of Jerry Butler and Philly Soul.” Roll-ing Stone (30 April 1970).
Lont, Cynthia M. “Women’s Music: No Longer a Small 
Private Party.” In Reebee Garofalo, ed., Rockin’ the Boat: Mass Music and Mass Movements. Boston: South End Press, 1992.
Lopez, Ana M. “ Are All Latins from Manhattan?: Holly-
wood, Ethnography, and Cultural Colonialism.” In Alan Williams, ed., Film and Nationalism. Philadel-
phia: Rutgers University Press, 2002.
Lott, Eric. Love and Theft: Blackface Minstrelsy and the 
American Working Class. New York: Oxford Univer-sity Press, 1993. 
———. “Love and Theft: The Racial Unconscious of 
Blackface Minstrelsy.” Representations (Summer 1992).
Luhr, Eileen. Witnessing Suburbia: Conservatives and Chris-
tian Youth Culture. Berkeley, CA: University of Cali-fornia Press, 2009.
Lydon, Michael. “The High Cost of Music and Love: 
Where’s the Money from Monterey?” Rolling Stone (9 November 1967).
———. Rock Folk: Portraits from the Rock ‘n’ Roll Pan-
theon. New York: Dell, 1968.
———. “Smokey Robinson.” Rolling Stone (28 September 
1968).
Lyman, Rick. “New Data Shows Immigrants’ Growth 
and Reach.” New York Times (15 August 2006).
Macan, Edward. Rocking the Classics: English Progressive 
Rock and the Counterculture. New York: Oxford Uni-versity Press, 1997.
MacDonald, Ian. Revolution in the Head: The Beatles’ 
 
Records and the Sixties, 3d. ed. Chicago: Chicago Review 
Press, 2007. B IBLIOGRAPHY 499Makower, Joel. Woodstock: The Oral History. New York: 
Doubleday, 1989.
Malone, Bill C. Country Music U.S.A., rev. ed. Austin: Uni-
versity of Texas Press, 1985.
Marcus, Greil. “Is This the Woman Who Invented Rock 
& Roll? The Deborah Chessler Story.” Rolling Stone 
(24 June 1993).
———. Mystery Train: Images of America in Rock ‘n’ Roll, 
5th ed. New York: Plume, 2008.
———. “Rock for Ethiopia.” Panel Presentation at the 
Third International Conference on Popular Music Studies, Montreal, Quebec, Canada (July 1985).
Marcus, Sara. Girls to the Front: The True Story of the Riot 
Grrrl Revolution. New York: HarperPerennial, 2010.
Marsh, Dave. Before I Get Old: The Story of the Who. New 
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1983.
———. “The Flip Sides of 1979.” Rolling Stone (27 De-
cember 1979).
———. “What’s Being Sold in Country?” New York 
Times (24 May 1992).
Marshall, Wayne. “The Rise of Reggaeton.” Boston Phoe-
nix (19 January 2006). http://www.thephoenix.
com/article_ektid1595.aspx.
Martin, Linda, and Kerry Segrave. Anti-Rock: The Opposi-
tion to Rock ‘n’ Roll. New York: DeCapo Press, 1993.
Mason, Kerri. “The Beat Generation.” Billboard (17 De-
cember 2011).
———. “Dance Dance Evolution.” Billboard (11 Febru-
ary 2012).
———. “Let the Beat Build (and Build, and Build).” Bill-
board (19 May 2012).
Maultsby, Portia K. “ Africanisms in African-American 
Popular Music.” In Joseph E. Holloway, ed., African-isms in American Culture. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1990.
May, Kirse Granat. Golden State, Golden Youth: The 
 
California Image in Popular Culture, 1955–1966. Cha-pel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2002.
McClary, Susan. Feminine Endings: Music, Gender, and 
Sexuality. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minne-sota Press, 1991.
McClary, Susan, and Robert Walser. “Start Making 
Sense: Musicology Wrestles with Rock.” In Simon Frith and Andrew Goodwin, eds., On Record: Rock, Pop, and the Written Word. New York: Pantheon Books, 1990.
McDonnell, Evelyn, and Ann Powers, eds. Rock She 
Wrote: Women Write About Rock, Pop, and Rap. New York: Delta, 1995.
McGuinn, Roger. Statement at the Senate Judiciary 
Committee Hearing on “The Future of Digi-tal Music: Is There an Upside to Downloading?” (11 July 2000). http://www.senate.gov/~judiciary/ 
7112000_rm.htmMcGuinness, Paul. “How to Save the Music Industry.” 
British GQ (13 August 2010). http://www.gq-mag-
azine.co.uk/entertainment/articles/2010-08/13/gq-music-paul-mcguinness-on-music-piracy.
McKinney, Devin. Magic Circles: The Beatles in Dream and 
History. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
2003.
McLeese, Don. “ Anatomy of an Anti-Disco Riot.” In These 
Times (29 August–4 September 1979).
McLeod, Kembrew. “Genres, Sub-Genres, Sub-Sub-
Genres and More: Musical and Social Differentia-tion Within Electronic-Dance Music Communities.” Journal of Popular Music Studies (Spring 2001).
McLeod, Kembrew, and Peter DiCola. Creative License: 
The Law and Culture of Digital Sampling. Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2011.
McNally, Dennis. A Long Strange Trip: The Inside History of 
the Grateful Dead. New York: Broadway Books, 2002.
McNeil, Legs, and Gillian McCain. Please Kill Me: The Un-
censored Oral History of Punk. New York: Penguin, 1996.
Meizel, Katherine. Idolized: Music, Media and Identity in 
American Idol. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2010.
Melnick, Jeffrey. 9/11 Culture. Malden, MA: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2009.
———. A Right to Sing the Blues: African Americans, Jews, 
and American Popular Song. Cambridge, MA: Har-vard University Press, 1999.
Merritt, Jay. “Disco Station Number One in New York.” 
Rolling Stone (22 March 1979).
Metzger, John. “Neil Young Are You Passionate?” 
The Music Box 9, no. 5 (May 2002). http://www. musicbox-online.com/ny-pass.html.
Miller, Jim. “It’s Not Only Rock ‘n’ Roll.” Boston Globe (23 
August 1991).
———, ed. The Rolling Stone Illustrated History of Rock ‘n’ 
Roll. New York: Rolling Stone Press, 1976.
———. “State of the Art.” Newsweek (18 April 1983).
Miller, Karl. Segregating Sound: Inventing Folk and Pop 
Music in the Age of Jim Crow. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2010.
Miller, Kiri. Playing Along: Digital Games, YouTube, and 
Virtual Performance. New York: Oxford University Press, 2012.
Mills, David. “Rap as Politics: The Sayings of Sister Soul-
jah.” Essence (September 1992).
Minton, Lynn. “Is Heavy Metal Dangerous?” Parade (20 
September 1992).
Monson, Ingrid. “Jazz Chronological Overview.” In 
Mellonee V . Burnim and Portia K. Maultsby, eds., African American Music: An Introduction. New York: Routledge, 2006.
Mooney, H. F . “Popular Music since the 1920s: The Sig-
nificance of Shifting Taste.” In Jonathan Eisen, ed., 
The Age of Rock. New York: Vintage Books, 1969.500  ROCKIN ’ OUTMoore, Jerrold Northrop. A Matter of Records: Fred Gais-
berg and the Golden Era of the Gramophone. New York: 
Taplinger Publishing Co., 1976.
Morris, Bonnie. Eden Built by Eves: The Culture of Women’s 
Music Festivals. Los Angeles: Alyson Books, 1999.
Morse, Dave. Motown. London: Vista, 1971.
Morse, Steve. “Can American Bands Beat the British 
Blitz?” Boston Globe (1 January 1984).
———. “Napster Strikes Dissonant Chords.” Boston 
Globe (5 May 2000).
———. “In Pop, Women Took New Ground All Over.” 
Boston Globe (29 December 1996).
Morton, David. Sound Recording: The Life Story of a Tech-
nology. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 
2006.
Mötley Crüe with Neil Strauss. The Dirt: Confessions of 
the World’s Most Notorious Band. New York: Regan Books, 2002.
Mudrian, Albert. Choosing Death: The Improbable History 
of Death Metal and Grindcore. Los Angeles: Feral House, 2004.
Muir, Peter. Long Lost Blues: Popular Blues in America, 
1850–1920. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2010.
Murray, Charles Shaar. Boogie Man: The Adventures of 
John Lee Hooker in the American Twentieth Century. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2000.
———. Crosstown Traffic: Jimi Hendrix and the Rock ‘n’ 
Roll Revolution. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1989.
“Music Industry Counts the Cost of Online Piracy.” 
The Guardian (4 April 2006). http://arts.guardian.co.uk/netmusic/story/0,,1746741,00.html.
“The MySpace Generation.” BusinessWeek (12 December 
2005). http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/05_50/b3963001.htm.
“N.J. Rock Station Won’t Play Jethro Tull.” Associated 
Press (13 November 2003). http://apnews.excite.com/article/20031113/D7UPO1981.html.
Nathan, David. “Rap.” Billboard (24 December 1988).
Neal, Mark Anthony. “The Tortured Soul of Marvin Gaye 
and R. Kelly.” PopMatters (3 August 2003). http://www.popmatters.com/pm/feature/031103-rkelly.
Neely, Kim. “ Alternative Music.” Rolling Stone (10–24 De-
cember 1992).
———. “Into the Unknown.” Rolling Stone (16 June 
1994).
———. “Lollapalooza ’92.” Rolling Stone (17 September 
1992).
Negus, Keith. Music Genres and Corporate Cultures. New 
York: Routledge, 1999.
Nelson, Havelock. “Music and Violence: Does Crime 
Pay?” Billboard (13 November 1993).
“New Black Hope.” Billboard (17 May 1969).
Newman, Melinda. “The Good, Bad, and Mostly Ugly of 
2002 Remembered.” Billboard (28 December 2002).“New p2p file sharing stats.” p2pnet.net News (22 October 
2004). http://p2pnet.net/story/2797.
Noonan, Jeffrey. The Guitar in America: Victorian Era to 
Jazz Age. Jackson, MS: University of Mississippi 
Press, 2008.
Noveck, Jocelyn. “Whole Lotta Love for ‘Idol’ Lam-
bert,” Boston Globe (16 May 2009). http://www.
boston.com/ae/tv/articles/2009/05/16/
whole_lotta_love_for_idol_lambert/.
Nunziata, Susan. “’90 Label Tally: Units Up 7.3%, $ Jump 
14.6%.” Billboard (6 April 1991).
Odum, Howard W ., and Guy B. Johnson. Negro Workaday 
Songs. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Caro-lina Press, 1926.
“Of Hard-Rock Demons: A Cardinal Speaks Out.” Boston 
Globe (6 March 1990).
Ogunnaike, Lola. “Caught in the Act.” Vibe (May 2002).
O’Neal, Jim, and Amy O’Neal. “Muddy Waters.” Living 
Blues (March–April 1985).
O’Neil, Thomas. The Grammys for the Record. New York: 
Penguin Books, 1993.
Orloff, Katherine. Rock ‘n’ Roll Woman. Los Angeles: 
Nash Publishing, 1974.
Orr, Charlene, et al. “Texas Police Pursue ‘Cop Killer.’“ 
Billboard (27 June 1992).
Ostling, Richard N. “No Sympathy for the Devil.” Time 
(19 March 1990).
Pacini Hernandez, Deborah. “Dominicans in the Mix: 
Reflections on Dominicans and Reggaeton.” In 
Raquel Z. Rivera, Deborah Pacini Hernandez, and Wayne Marshall, eds., Reggaeton. Durham NC: Duke University Press, 2009.
———. Oye Como V a!: Hybridity and Identity in Latino 
Popular Music. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2010.
———. “Race, Ethnicity and the Production of Latin/o 
Popular Music.” In Andreas Gabesmair and 
 
Alfred 
Smudits, eds., Global Repertoires: Popular Music within and beyond the Transnational Music Industry. Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing Ltd., 2001.
Palmer, Robert. “The Church of the Sonic Guitar.” In 
 
Anthony DeCurtis, ed., Present Tense: Rock & Roll and Culture. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1992.
———. Deep Blues. New York: Viking Press, 1981.
———. “The Fifties.” Rolling Stone (19 April 1990).
———. “New Rock from the Suburbs.” New York Times 
(23 September 1984).
Pareles, Jon. “Howls of Rage, Nine Hours Worth, at Wa-
terloo Village. New York Times (13 August 1991).
———. “Music; So Sweet, So Sensitive, So Self-
 
Absorbed, So 70’s.” New York Times (18 May 2003). http://www.nytimes.com/2003/05/18/arts/ music-so-sweet-so-sensitive-so-self-absorbed-so-
70-s.html. B IBLIOGRAPHY 501———. “There’s a New Sound in Pop Music: Bigotry.” 
New York Times (10 September 1989).
Passman, Arnold. The Deejays. New York: Macmillan, 
1971.
Patterson, L. Ray, and Stanley W . Lindberg. The Nature 
of Copyright: A Law of User’s Rights. Athens, GA: 
 
University of Georgia Press, 1991.
Pearson, Nathan. Goin’ to Kansas City. Urbana, IL: 
 
University of Illinois Press, 1994.
Peck, Abe. “Disco! Disco! Disco! Four Critics Address the 
Musical Question.” In These Times (6–12 June 1979).
Pegg, Dave. Brown-Eyed Handsome Man:The Life and 
Hard Times of Chuck Berry. New York: Routledge, 
2002.
Peraino, Vito. “The Law of Increasing Returns.” Wired 
(August 1999).
Pérez Firmat, Gustavo. “Latunes: An Introduction.” 
Latin American Research Review (December 2008).
Perry, Steve. “ Ain’t No Mountain High Enough: The 
Politics of Crossover.” In Simon Frith, ed., Facing the 
Music. New York: Pantheon Books, 1988.
Peterbaugh, Parke. “ Anglomania: America Surrenders 
to the Brits—But Who Really Wins?” Rolling Stone  
(10 November 1983).
Peterson, Richard A. Creating Country Music: Fabricating 
Authenticity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997.
———. “Why 1955? Explaining the Advent of Rock 
Music.” Popular Music (January 1990).
Peterson, Richard A., and David C. Berger. “Cycles in 
Symbol Production: The Case of Popular Music.” American Sociological Review (April 1975).
Pietroluongo, Silvio Minal Patel, and Wade Jessen, “Sin-
gles Minded: Hot 100 Adds Digital Sales; Pop 100 Debuts.” Billboard (12 February 2005).
Pillsbury, Glenn. Damage Incorporated: Metallica and the 
Production of Identity. New York: Routledge, 2006.
Pinch, Trevor, and Frank Trocco. Analog Days: The Inven-
tion and Impact of the Moog Synthesizer. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002.
“Playboy Poll: Napster Users Buy CD’s.” MP3 Newswire 
(17 August 2000). http://www.mp3newswire.net/stories/2000/playboy.html.
Pond, Steve. Head Hunters: The Making of Jazz’s First 
Platinum Album. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 2005.
Pond, Steve. “The Seventies.” Rolling Stone (20 Septem-
ber 1990).
———. “The Trick Is to Be Loved but Not Embraced.” 
New York Times (26 June 1994).
Potier, Beth. “File Sharing May Boost CD Sales: Study 
Defies Traditional Beliefs About Internet Use.” Harvard Gazette Archives (15 April 2004). http://www.news.harvard.edu/gazette/2004/04.15/09-
filesharing.html.Powers, Ann. “Frank Talk with Lady Gaga.” Los Angeles Times   
(13 December 2009). http://articles.latimes.com/2009/  
dec/13/entertainment/la-ca-lady-gaga13-2009dec13.
———. “Salting Raps with Humor, Mining Hip-Hop 
for Fun.” New York Times (14 March 2001). http://
www.nytimes.com/2001/03/14/arts/pop-review-salting-raps-with-humor-mining-hip-hop-for-fun.html.
Pruter, Robert. Chicago Soul. Urbana, IL: University of 
Illinois Press, 1992.
Ptacek, Greg. “Majors Return to Nuts and Bolts of 
 
Pre-MTV Metal Marketing Days.” Billboard (27 
April 1985).
Pugh, Ronnie. Ernest Tubb: The Texas Troubadour. 
 
Durham,  
NC: Duke University Press, 1996. 
Ramsey, Guthrie. Race Music: From Bebop to Hip-Hop. 
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2003.
“Readers Poll.” Rolling Stone (20 January 2000).
Reagon, Bernice Johnson. “Songs That Moved the Move-
ment.” Civil Rights Quarterly (Summer 1983).
“Record Business Sees Light Ahead—On Video Screen.” 
Chicago Tribune (26 April 1983).
Recording Industry Association of America. Inside the 
Recording Industry: A Statistical Overview, Update 
’86. New York: Recording Industry Association of America, 1986.
Reuters. “BMG Says It Discussed Business Models with 
Napster.” CNET News.com (3 October 2000). http:// news.cnet.com/news/0-1005-200-2927330.html.
———. “Music Industry Still in First Gear Online.” (7 
January 2002). http://news.com.com/2100-1023-802359.html.
———. “Prince Voices Support for Napster.” CNET 
News.com (9 August 2000). http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1005-200-2482624.html.
Reynolds, Simon. Generation Ecstasy: Into the World of 
Techno and Rave Culture. New York: Routledge, 1999.
———. Rip It up and Start Again: Postpunk 1978–1984. 
New York: Penguin, 2005.
RIAA. “Record Industry Announces 2000 Midyear 
Shipment Data” (press release). Washington, D.C. (25 August 2000). http://www.riaa.com/newsitem.php?news_month_filter=8&news_year_filter=2000&resultpage=&id=3525ABBC-B110-C3F5-8B63-AC4D3802C9C2.
RIAA v. The People: Two Years Later. Electronic Fron-
tier Foundation, 2005. http://w2.eff.org/IP/P2P/ RIAAatTWO_FINAL.pdf.
Richards, Keith, with James Fox. Life. New York: Little, 
Brown and Company, 2010.
Rietveld, Hillegonda C. This Is Our House: House Music, 
Cultural Spaces and Technologies. Brookfield, VT: Ashgate, 1998.
Rijven, Stan. “Rock for Ethiopia.” Panel Presentation 
at the Third International Conference on Popular 502  ROCKIN ’ OUTMusic Studies, Montreal, Quebec, Canada (July 
1985).
Roberts, John Storm. The Latin Tinge: The Impact of Latin 
American Music on the United States. Tivoli, NY: Original Music, 1985.
Rock & Roll Confidential, The Editors of. You’ve Got a 
Right to Rock. Los Angeles: Duke and Duchess Ven-
tures, Inc., 1990.
Rockwell, John. “ Atwater’s Other Hat: Stealing an Inau-
gural Show.” New York Times (23 January 1989).
———. “Leftist Causes? Rock Seconds Those Emo-
tions.” New York Times (11 December 1988).
Rodman, Sarah. “Music Lovers Pack Halls, Drown the 
Money Blues,” Boston Globe (20 May 2009). http://
www.boston.com/news/local/massachusetts/articles/2009/05/20/music_lovers_pack_halls_drown_the_money_blues/.
Roland, Tom. “How Sparks Fly.” Billboard (10 December 
2011).
Rose, Tricia. Black Noise: Rap Music and Black Culture in 
Contemporary America. Hanover, NH: University Press of New England, 1994.
Rosenberg, Neil. Bluegrass: A History. Urbana, IL: Uni-
versity of Illinois Press, 1985.
“Roxio Buys Pressplay, to Relaunch Napster.” Salon.
com (19 May 2003). http://www.salon.com/tech/wire/2003/05/19/roxio_pressplay/index.html.
Roxon, Lillian. Lillian Roxon’s Rock Encyclopedia. New 
York: Grosset and Dunlap, 1971.
Salazar, Max. Mambo Kingdom: Latin Music in New York. 
New York: Schirmer, 2002.
Sandoval, Greg. “Judgment Against Jammie Thomas Low-
ered from $1.5 Million to $54,000.” CNET News.com (22 July 2011). http://news.cnet.com/8301-31001_3-20081934-261/jammie-thomas-judgment-l  
owered-from-$1.5-million-to-$54000.
Sanjek, David. “Can a Fujiyama Mama Be the Female 
Elvis? The Wild Wild Women of Rockabilly.” In Sheila Whiteley, ed., Sexing the Groove. New York: Routledge, 1997.
Sanjek, Russell. American Popular Music and Its Business. 3 
vols. New York: Oxford University Press, 1988.
———. “The War on Rock.” In Downbeat Music ’72 Year -
book. Chicago: Maher Publications, 1972.
Saunders, Michael. “Getting Hip to Pop.” Boston Globe (9 
May 1993).
Savage, Jon. England’s Dreaming: Anarchy, Sex Pistols, Punk 
Rock, and Beyond. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1992.
Scaduto, Anthony. Bob Dylan. New York: Signet Books, 
1973.
Scaggs, Austin. “Why Is Nelly Furtado’s New Album 
So Loud?” Rolling Stone (19 June 2006). http://www.rollingstone.com/news/story/10603268/why_is_nelly_furtados_new_album_so_loud.Schawbel, Dan. “Inside the Brand of Justin Bieber: An 
Interview with Manager Scooter Braun.” Forbes 
(11 February 2011). http://www.forbes.com/sites/ danschawbel/2011/02/11/inside-the-brand-of-justin-  
bieber-an-interview-with-manager-scooter-braun.
Schechter, Danny. “Why We Didn’t See Wembley.” Africa 
Report (July–August 1990).
Scherman, Tony. Backbeat: Earl Palmer’s Story. Washing-
ton, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1999.
Schicke, C. A. Revolution in Sound: A Biography of the Re-
cording Industry. Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1974.
Schipper, Henry. “Dick Clark.” Rolling Stone (19 April 
1990).
Schloss, Joseph. Making Beats: The Art of Sample-Based 
Hip Hop. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University 
Press, 2004.
Schmelz, Peter. “‘Have You Forgotten?’: Darryl Worley 
and the Musical Politics of Operation Iraqi Free-dom.” In Jonathan Ritter and J. Martin Daughtry, eds., Music in the Post-9/11 World. New York: Rout-
ledge, 2007.
Schruers, Fred. “Master P .” Rolling Stone (29 October 
1998).
Schuller, Gunther. Early Jazz: Its Roots and Musical Devel-
opment. New York: Oxford University Press, 1968.
Schumacher, Joseph. “Is Protest Music as Dead as 
Disco?” Peace and Conflict Monitor (12 May 2003).  
http://www.monitor. upeace.org/innerpg.cfm?id_ article=5.
Schwartz, John. “ A Heretical View of File Sharing.” New 
York Times (5 April 2004). http://www.nytimes.com/2004/04/05/technology/05music.html.
Scott, Derek. Sounds of the Metropolis: The 19th-Century 
Popular Music Revolution in London,  New York, Paris, 
and Vienna. New York: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Segall, Laurie. “Digital Music Sales Top Physical Sales.” 
CNN Money (5 January 2012). http://money.cnn.com/2012/01/05/technology/digital_music_sales/  
index.htm.
Seldes, Gilbert. The Seven Lively Arts. 1924. Reprint, New 
York: A.S. Barnes, 1957.
“Senator: Trash Illegal Downloaders’ PCs.” CNN.
com (18 June 2003). http://www.cnn.com/2003/TECH/internet/06/18/download.music.ap/index.html.
Shank, Barry. “Fears of the White Unconscious: Music, 
Race, and Identification in the Censorship of ‘Cop Killer’.” Radical History Review (Fall 1996).
Shapiro, Nat. Popular Music: An Annotated Index of Ameri-
can Popular Songs: 1940–1949. Vol. 2. New York: Adrian Press, 1965.
Shapiro, Peter. Turn the Beat Around: The Secret History of 
Disco. New York: Faber and Faber, 2005. B IBLIOGRAPHY 503Shaw, Arnold. Black Popular Music in America. New York: 
Schirmer Books, 1986.
———. Honkers and Shouters: The Golden Years of Rhythm 
and Blues. New York: Collier Books, 1978.
———. The Rockin’ ’50s. New York: Hawthorne Books, 
1974.
Sheffield, Rob. “Rage Against the Latrines.” Rolling Stone 
(2 September 1999).
Shepherd, Julianne Escobedo. “‘21’ & Up.” Billboard  
(17 December 2011).
Shore, Laurence Kenneth. “The Crossroads of Busi-
ness and Music: A Study of the Music Industry in 
the United States and Internationally.” PhD diss. 
 
Stanford University, 1983.
Shore, Michael. The Rolling Stone Book of Rock Video.  
London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1985.
Sicko, Dan. Techno Rebels: The Renegades of Electronic 
Funk. New York: Billboard Books, 1999.
Simpson, Kim. Early ’70s Radio: The American Format 
Revolution. New York: Continuum, 2011.
Sinnreich, Aram. Mashed Up: Music, Technology, and the 
Rise of Configurable Culture. Amherst, MA: Univer-
sity of Massachusetts Press, 2010.
Small, Christopher. Music of the Common Tongue: Survival 
and Celebration in Afro-American Music. New York: Riverrun Press, 1987.
Smith, Ethan. “Organization Moby.” Wired (May 2002).
Smith, Jeff. The Sounds of Commerce: Marketing Popular 
Film Music. New York: Columbia University Press, 1998.
Smith, Joe. Off the Record: An Oral History of Popular Mu-
sic. New York: Warner Books, 1988.
Smith, Patti. Just Kids. New York: Ecco, 2010.
Smith, Richard. “Will Heavy Metal Survive the Seven-
ties?” Circus (11 May 1978).
Smith, Suzanne. Dancing in the Street: Motown and the Cul-
tural Politics of Detroit. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999. 
“The Sound of Lawsuits.” Editorial, San Jose Mercury 
News (9 September 2003). http://www.bayarea.com/mld/mercurynews/news/opinion/6727444.htm.
Souter, Justice David. “MGM v. Grokster.” Supreme 
Court of the United States, No. 04-480 (27 June 2005).
Southern, Eileen. The Music of Black Americans: A History. 
New York: W .W . Norton, 1971.
Stambler, Irwin. Encyclopedia of Pop, Rock & Soul. New 
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1977.
Staples, Brent. “The Trouble with Corporate Ra-
dio: The Day the Protest Music Died.” New York Times (20 February 2003). http://www.nytimes.com/2003/02/20/opinion/20THU4.html?th=&pagewanted=print&position=bottom.Stark, Phyllis. “Gangsta Rap Under the Gun.” Billboard 
(18 December 1993).
Steinfels, Peter. “Surge in Satanic Activity Alarms 
O’Connor.” New York Times (6 March 1990).
Sterne, Jonathan. “The Mp3 as Cultural Artifact.” New 
Media and Society (2006).
Stowe, David. Swing Changes: Big Band Jazz in New 
Deal America. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1994.
Strauss, Neil. “File-Sharing Battle Leaves Musicians 
Caught in Middle.” New York Times (14 Septem-ber 2003). http://www.nytimes.com/2003/09/14/technology/14MUSI.html.
———. “For Record Industry, All Signs Are Gloomy.” 
New York Times (4 December 1996).
———. “The Hit Girl: Christina Aguilera.” Rolling Stone 
(6–20 July 2000).
Straw, Will. “Rock for Ethiopia.” Panel Presentation at 
the Third International Conference on Popular Mu-
sic Studies. Montreal, Quebec, Canada (July 1985).
Stuart, Dan. “Black Radio.” Billboard (17 June 1989).
Sublette, Ned. “The Kingsmen and the Cha-Cha-Cha.” In 
Eric Weisbard, ed., Listen Again: A Momentary His-
tory of Pop Music. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2007.
Suisman, David. Selling Sound: The Commercial Revolution 
in American Music. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-versity Press, 2009.
Sullivan, Andy. “Music Firms, DJ Offer to Pay 12-Year-
Old’s Fine.” Reuters (11 September 2003). http://www.reuters.com/newsArticle.jhtml;jsessionid=GJHB5ZIZY5BNACRBAEKSFFA?type=topNews&storyID=3431108.
Sullivan, James. “Three’s the Charm as the Last Lilith 
All-Women Music Festival Loses Its Sensitive Side.” San Francisco Chronicle (15 July 1999), reported on Geocities.com. http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/ar-ticle.cgi?f=/c/a/1999/07/15/DD90915.DTL.
Sullivan, Jim. “Lollapalooza: The Sound of Success.” Bos-
ton Globe (2 August 1992).
Théberge, Paul. Any Sound You Can Imagine: Making 
 
Music/Consuming Technology. Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University Press, 1997.
Thigpen, David. “Up Against the Wall.” Rolling Stone (24 
February 1994).
Thompson, Art. Stompboxes: A History of Guitar Fuzzes, 
Flangers, Phasers, Echoes & Wahs. San Francisco: Miller Freeman Books, 1997.
Thornton, Sarah. Club Cultures: Music, Media and Subcul-
tural Capital. Hanover, NH: University Press of New England, 1995.
Toll, Robert. Blacking Up: The Minstrel Show in Nine-
teenth-Century America. New York: Oxford Univer-sity Press, 1974.504  ROCKIN ’ OUTToop, David. The Rap Attack 2: African Rap to Global Hip 
Hop. London: Serpent’s Tail, 1991.
Tosches, Nick. Country: Living Legends and Dying Meta-
phors in America’s Biggest Music. New York: Charles 
Scribner’s Sons, 1985.
Touré. “Best Soul Superstar: Adele.” Rolling Stone (28 
April 2011).
———. “DMX Reigns as the Dark Prince of Hip Hop.” 
Rolling Stone (13 April 2000).
———. “The Life of a Hunted Man.” Rolling Stone  
(3 April 2003).
———. “The Next Queen of Soul.” Rolling Stone (8 No-
vember 2001).
———. “Snoop Dogg’s Gentle Hip Hop Growl.” New 
York Times (21 November 1993).
———. “True Tales of the Pop Life: ’N Sync.” Rolling 
Stone (16 August 2001).
Townshend, Charles R. San Antonio Rose: The Life and 
Music of Bob Wills. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois 
Press, 1976.
Trynka, Paul. Iggy Pop: Open Up and Bleed. New York: 
Broadway Books, 2007.
Tschmuck, Peter. Creativity and Innovation in the Music In-
dustry, E-book ed. Berlin: Springer, 2012.
Tucker, Sherrie. Swing Shift: “ All-Girl” Bands of the 1940s. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2000.
Tyrangiel, Josh. “Radio Says: Pay What You Want.” Time 
(1 October 2007). http://www.time.com/time/arts/article/0,8599,1666973,00.html.
———. “You Can’t Ignore Kanye.” Time (29 August 
2005).
Udovitch, Mim. “Pink Fights the Power.” Rolling Stone 
(4–11 July 2002).
———. “Shakira.” Rolling Stone (31 October 2002).
Unterberger, Richie. Turn! Turn! Turn! The ’60s Folk-
Rock Revolution. San Francisco: Backbeat Books, 2002.
U.S. Census Bureau. “Table 1.1 Population by Sex, Age, 
Hispanic Origin, and Race: 2004.” http://www. census.gov/population/socdemo/hispanic/ASEC2004/  
2004CPS_tab1.1a.html.
Vernallis, Carol. Experiencing Music Video: Aesthetics and 
Cultural Context. New York: Columbia University Press, 2004.
Vincent, Rickey. Funk: The Music, The People, and the 
Rhythm of the One. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1996.
Waddell, Ray. “Burning Up the Road: Both Dollars and 
Attendance Prove Touring Is Out of Its Slump.” Billboard (23 December 2006). 
———. “Rise of the Super-Manager: As Labels Stumble, 
Managers Become the Industry’s Force to Be Reck-oned With.” Billboard (20 December 2008). 
———. “Touring Strong, but Some Numbers Cause 
Concern.” Billboard (28 December 2002).Waksman, Steve. Instruments of Desire: The Electric Gui-
tar and the Shaping of Musical Experience. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1999.
———. This Ain’t the Summer of Love: Conflict and Cross-
over in Heavy Metal and Punk. Berkeley, CA: Univer-
sity of California Press, 2009.
———. “The Turn to Noise: Rock Guitar from the 1950s 
to the 1970s.” In Victor Coelho, ed., The Cambridge Companion to the Guitar. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Waksman, Steve, with Omar Corrado and Sergio Sau-
valle. “Guitars.” In John Shepherd, David Horn, Dave Laing, Paul Oliver, and Peter Wicke, eds., En-cyclopedia of Popular Music of the World, Volume 2: Per -
formance and Production. London: Continuum, 2003.
Wald, Elijah. Escaping the Delta: Robert Johnson and the 
 
Invention of the Blues. New York: Amistad, 2004. 
———. How the Beatles Destroyed Rock ‘n’ Roll: An Alter -
native History of American Popular Music. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2009.
Walker, Rob. “The Grey Album.” New York Times 
Magazine (21 March 2004). http://www.nytimes.com/2004/03/21/magazine/21CONSUMED.html.
Walser, Robert, ed. Keeping Time: Readings in Jazz  
History. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999.
———. Running with the Devil: Power, Gender, and Mad-
ness in Heavy Metal Music. Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University Press, 1993.
Ward, Brian. Just My Soul Responding: Rhythm and Blues, 
Black Consciousness, and Race Relations. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1998.
Warhol, Andy, and Pat Hackett. POPism: The Warhol ’60s. 
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1980.
Warwick, Jacqueline. Girl Groups, Girl Culture: Popular 
Music and Identity in the 1960s. New York: Routledge, 2007.
Watkins, Craig. Representing: Hip Hop Culture and the  
Production of Black Cinema. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998.
Watrous, Peter. “Good Things Happen to Lollapalooza.” 
New York Times (5 August 1992).
Watson, Margeaux, “The End of Outkast?” EW .com 
 
(retrieved on 24 August 2006). http://www.ew.com/ ew/report/0,6115,1195670_4_0_,00.html.
Weiner, Jonah. “From Deadmau5 to Your House.” Rolling 
Stone (17 February 2011).
Weinstein, Deena. Heavy Metal: A Cultural Sociology. New 
York: Lexington Books, 1991.
Welch, Chris. “Magnificent Seven.” Melody Maker (9 Sep-
tember 1967).
Welch, Nathaniel. “Hit Man.” Rolling Stone (22 August 
2002).
Wenner, Jann. “ A Letter from the Editor.” Rolling Stone  
(9 November 1967). B IBLIOGRAPHY 505———. “ A Letter from the Editor: On the Occasion of 
Our Fourth Anniversary Issue.” Rolling Stone (11 
November 1971).
———. “Musicians Reject New Political Exploiters.” 
Rolling Stone (11 May 1968).
Werde, Bill. “ Artist of the Year: Taylor Swift.” Billboard 
(19 December 2009).
———. “Defiant Downloads Rise from Underground.” 
New York Times (25 February 2004). http://www.
nytimes.com/2004/02/25/arts/defiant-down-loads-rise-from-underground.html.
“Wexler Attributes Greater R&B Volume to Black 
Buyer.” Billboard (20 November 1971).
Wexler, Jerry, and David Ritz. Rhythm and the Blues: A 
Life in American Music. New York: Knopf, 1993. 
Wharton, Dennis. “D.C. Bluebloods Want X Rating for 
Porn Rock.” V ariety (22 May 1985).
Whitburn, Joel. The Billboard Book of Top 40 Albums. New 
York: Billboard, 1991.
———. The Billboard Book of Top 40 Hits, 7th ed. New 
York: Billboard, 2000.
Whitcomb, Ian. After the Ball: Popular Music from Rag to 
Rock. Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1974.
White, Charles. The Life and Times of Little Richard. New 
York: Pocket Books, 1984.
Wicke, Peter. Rock Music: Culture, Aesthetics and Sociol-
ogy. Cambridge, UKs: Cambridge University Press, 
1990.
Widgery, David. Beating Time: Riot ‘n’ Race ‘n’ Rock ‘n’ 
Roll. London: Chatto and Windus, 1986.
Wilkinson, Francis. “More Washington Show Talk.” 
Rolling Stone (9 December 1993).
Willis, Ellen. “Beginning to See the Light: Or Rock & 
Roll, Feminism, and Night Blindness.” Village Voice 
(27 March 1978).Witmark, Isidore, and Isaac Goldberg. From Ragtime to 
Swingtime: The Story of the House of Witmark. New 
York: Lee Furman, Inc., 1939.
Wolfe, Charles. The Devil’s Box: Masters of Southern Fiddling. 
Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press, 1997.
Wolfe, Tom. The Kandy-Kolored Tangerine-Flake Streamline 
Baby. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1965.
Work, John W . American Negro Songs. New York: 1960.
Yi, Matthew. “One Billion Songs Sold on iTunes.” San 
Francisco Chronicle (24 February 2006). http:// 
www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2006/02/  
24/BUG9THDRI31.DTL.
York, Peter. Style Wars. London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 
1980.
Young, Charles M. “Rock Is Sick and Living in London:  
A Report on the Sex Pistols.” Rolling Stone (20 
 
October 1977).
Zak, Albin. I Don’t Sound Like Nobody: Remaking Music in 
1950s America. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michi-
gan Press, 2011.
Zappa, Frank. “The Porn Wars.” Penthouse (May 1989).
Zaslow, Jeffrey. “Music and Money.” Wall Street Journal 
(21 May 1985).
Zeidler, Sue. “Music Industry Sends Warning to Song 
Swappers.” Yahoo News (29 April 2003). http://
msl1.mit.edu/furdlog/docs/2003-04-29_yahoo_ reuters_riaa_threat.pdf.
Zimmerman, K. “Priest Ruling Gives Unclear Message.” 
V ariety (3 September 1990).
Zook, Kristal Brent. “Reconstructions of Nationalist 
Thought in Black Music and Culture.” In Reebee Garofalo, ed., Rockin’ the Boat. Boston: South End Press, 1992.
Zwick, Edward. “ An Interview with the Father of Hi-Fi:  
Dr. Peter Goldmark.” Rolling Stone (27 September 1973).506Subject Index
AAC files, 428
Aaliyah, 392, 403Aaron, Charles, 403ABBA, 12ABC (TV network), 136, 142, 288, 
351, 454
ABC (band), 289
ABC-Paramount, 10, 89, 99, 
130, 137
Above the Rim, 357Abrams, Lee, 295Abramson, Herb, 72AC/DC, 241, 319, 340, 382, 432
Ace, Johnny, 94
Ace of Cups, 225Ace Records, 89, 123Acid house music, 443Acid rock, 182–184Ackerman, Paul, 139Acoustic recording, 21–23Acquisitions and mergers, 56, 
57, 198–200, 360, 361–363, 418
ACT-UP , 378Acuff, Roy, 52, 55, 59, 61, 228, 229Acuff-Rose Music, 61, 68, 122
Adam, Margie, 227Adams, Faye, 101Adams, Stanley, 140Ade, King Sunny, 310Adele, 360, 407, 412, 415Adler, Bill, 341Adler, Lou, 143, 185, 220The Adventures of Ozzie and 
 
Harriet, 137
Advertising, 34–35, 363, 423Adverts, 265Aerosmith, 234, 240, 319, 337, 
338, 363
Affirmative action, 264Affleck, Ben, 386Afghanistan, 417, 431, 433, 436, 
437, 438
AFM. See American Federation 
of Musicians (AFM)
African Americans. See also Civil 
rights movement; Race; Racism
AOR stations, 295ASCAP membership, 31Beatles and, 164–165
black pride, 172blaxploitation films, 212in country and western 
music, 10–11crossover, 9
effect on rock ‘n’ roll, 7–8, 
82–84
field recording, 46–47, 444in heavy metal, 331
Jim crow laws, 41MTV’s selection, 290in music videos, 288, 290–
293, 295, 296
race music and, 9in radio and film, 54–55rhythm and blues music and, 
9–10, 68–70
soul music and, 212–218superstars, 284, 304–305Tin Pan Alley and, 25–29at Woodstock, 194–195
African Melodists, 19African National Congress 
(ANC), 312–313, 315
After Hours Swing Session (radio 
program), 78
AFTRA. See American Fed-
eration of Television and Radio Artists (AFTRA)
Ageism, 88
Aguilera, Christina, 364, 365, 
367, 383, 409
Akon, 390Alabama, 310, 365Alabama White Citizens Coun-
cil, 123
Aladdin label, 70, 89, 94, 128Album-oriented rock (AOR), 
202, 288, 295, 324
Aldon Music, 138, 221Alexander, David, 352Alexander, J. W ., 103Al Green, 215Ali, Muhammad, 335, 431Alice in Chains, 370, 376Alighieri, Dante, 349Allen, Harry, 342Allen, Kris, 453Allen, Lee, 83, 88Allen, Steve, 140Allen Brothers, 43Allman, Duane, 232, 328Allman, Greg, 232Allman Brothers, 232All the Young Dudes, 245
Almanac Singers, 159Alpert, Herb, 175Altamont Speedway, 193, 
195–196Alternative music, 227, 333, 359, 
364, 370–373, 374, 408
growth of, 408
teen pop and, 364women and, 227
Alternative Nation, 379
Alternative Tentacles label, 353Amandla: Festival of Unity, 224Amazon, 428Amboy Dukes, 181, 237America: A Tribute to Heroes, 430American Bandstand, 94, 135, 
136–137, 213, 287
American Express Company, 288American Family Association, 
352
American Federation of Musi-
cians (AFM), 61–63
American Federation of Televi-
sion and Radio Artists (AFTRA), 63
American Idol, 386, 452–454American Marconi, 31, 32American Record Company, 
56, 57
American Society of Composers, 
Authors, and Publishers 
(ASCAP), 80, 126, 127, 140, 141
black membership, 31boycott of, 61founding of, 31membership, 31opposition to rock ‘n’ roll, 
140–141
radio royalties, 34, 60
American Telephone and Tele-
graph (AT&T), 32, 35, 309
American Tobacco Company, 34American Top 40 (TV program), 
400
Ames Brothers, 125Ammons, Albert, 88Amnesty International, 310, 
311, 313, 372
Amos, Tori, 408Amos ‘n’ Andy, 34Amplitude modulation (AM), 76A&M Records, 175, 349, 361, 
363
ANC. See African National 
 
Congress (ANC)
Andersen, Signe, 184
Anderson, Chris, 462–463Anderson, Derek, 394
Anderson, Ian, 210Anderson, Jon, 208Anderson, Pamela, 404Anderson, Rusty, 385
Anderson, Tanya, 426André 3000, 405Androgyny, 13–14, 242–246Angels, 151Angel Witch, 319Animals, 164, 165, 169, 185, 189Anka, Paul, 112, 122, 134, 
137–138
Ansen, David, 280Ant, Adam, 261, 289Anthem (Rand), 237Anthem, defined, 298Anthony, Marc, 383, 384, 386Anthony, Michael, 240, 323Anthrax, 327Anti-Apartheid Movement, 312Anti-Flag, 440Anti-Nazi League, 265Antinuclear movement, 224Antiwar movement, 196, 197Antiwar music, 438–441
AOL-Time Warner, 418, 423AOR. See Album-Oriented Rock 
(AOR)
Appel, Mike, 223–224Apple, 419, 428–429Apple, Fiona, 409Apple label, 219A&P supermarket chain, 34Araya, Tom, 327The Archies, 34Area Code 615, 228Areas, José Chepitó, 179Argo label, 71, 89Arie, India, 410Ariola label, 361Arista label, 254, 300, 361, 384Aristocrat Records, 71Armed Forces Radio Network, 
59
Armstrong, Billie Joe, 379Armstrong, Edwin H., 76–77Armstrong, Lillian, 52, 53Armstrong, Louis “Satchmo,” 
35, 44, 47, 48, 52, 53, 71, 126, 151
Arnaz, Desi, 38
Arnold, Gina, 372, 380Arthur, Charlene, 123Artistics, 257 SUBJECT  I NDE x  507Artist Nation, 457
Artists Against AIDS World-
wide, 429
Art rock, 203–211ASCAP . See American Society of 
Composers, Authors, and 
Publishers (ASCAP)
Ashanti, 399Asher, Peter, 219Asheton, Ron, 252, 263Asheton, Scott, 252Ashford, Nick, 157Ashford and Simpson, 310
Association, 181
Astaire, Fred, 37, 292Astronauts, 143Aswad, 265Asylum Records, 199Atkins, Chet, 117, 118Atkins, Cholly, 155Atkins, Juan, 443Atlantic Records, 70, 121, 123, 
199, 213, 215, 217, 237
British rock, 212Crosby, Stills and Nash, 195Bobby Darin and, 133
disco music, 279, 282doo wop music, 106reggaeton music, 389rhythm and blues music, 
72–73, 101
southern soul music, 
172–173
twist records, 135Yes and, 210
ATO, 459AT&T. See American Telephone 
and Telegraph (AT&T)
Audion, 32Auslander, Philip, 243Austin, Ray, 3Austin City Limits, 457Automatic Musical Instrument 
Company, 56
Autry, Gene, 52, 55–56, 66Avalon, Frankie, 132, 133, 134, 
136, 143
Avengers, 258Average White Band, 272Axton, Estelle, 172Ayler, Albert, 253
Azanian National Liberation 
Army, 315
Azteca, 181
Babes in Toyland, 36
Babyface. See Edmunds, Kenneth 
“Babyface”
Bacharach, Burt, 154Bachman, Randy, 234Bachman, William, 75Bachman-Turner Overdrive, 234Back catalogue sales, 306, 363, 
462. See also Long tail 
marketing
Backfire, 373
Backlash, 373
Backstreet Boys (BSB), 364, 365, 
366, 429
Bad Boy Entertainment. See Bad 
Boy Records
Bad Boy Records, 357, 393–394, 
396, 397, 398, 405
Bad Brains, 269, 270Bad Company, 240
Bad Religion, 380
Badu, Erykah, 409Baez, Joan, 159, 162, 194, 224, 
309
Bag, Alice, 267Bag Band, 267Bailey, Deford, 55Bailey, Philip, 273Baker, Anita, 304, 312Baker, Arthur, 314Baker, Ginger, 167, 182Baker, James, 347Baker, LaVern, 72, 83, 84, 138
Baker, Rick, 292Baker, Susan, 347, 349, 352, 353Bakke, Alan, 264Balin, Marty, 196Baline, Israel. See Berlin, Irving
Ballard, Florence, 156–157, 158Ballard, Hank, 94, 103, 134Baltimore, Charli, 399, 402Bambaataa, Afrika, 310, 333, 
334, 335, 336, 343
The Band, 193, 229, 233Band Aid, 306, 307Band für Africa, 310Bangles, 432Bangs, Lester, 202, 234, 252, 264Banjo, 19, 41–42Banjo-Mandolin-Guitar move-
ment, 42
Baraka, Amiri, 27, 28, 43–44, 68Barber, Samuel, 395Baretto, Ray, 310Barnouw, Erik, 35Barrel House, 94Barrett, Syd, 210Barretto, Ray, 178
Barrino, Fantasia, 401, 454Barron, Steve, 292Barry, Jeff, 138, 153–154Barry, Robert J., 352Bartholomew, Dave, 88, 89, 
90, 91
Barton, Geoff, 319Bashe, Philip, 320Basie, Count, 49–50, 126. 
See also Count Basie 
 
Orchestra
Bass, Ralph, 100Bataan, Joe, 276
Baxter, Les, 125Bayes, Nora, 31BBC. See British Broadcasting 
Corporation (BBC)
B. Bumble and the Stingers, 144
Beach Boys, 143, 144, 145, 146, 
184–185, 198, 348
Beach Party, 143Beastie Boys, 340, 398, 403, 
430, 437
Beatles, 4, 100, 120, 145, 148, 
149, 198, 202, 203, 204, 
206, 219, 232, 236, 237, 
292, 308, 363, 445
civil rights movement and, 
163–164
drug references, 181Dylan and, 169–170early career, 164–168politics and, 192popular music transforma-
tion and, 163
sexual liberation and, 192Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts 
Club Band, 4, 5–6, 146–
147, 184–185, 201, 203, 206, 207, 280
Beatles-esque pop, 380Beats by the Pound, 394Beat Street, 335Beatty, Warren, 220Bechet, Sidney, 41Beck, Jeff, 182, 183, 205, 235Becker, Walter, 248Bee Gees, 279–280, 303Beethoven, 281Belafonte, Harry, 131–132, 162, 
307
Belknap, Ray, 352Bell, Al, 173, 217–218Bell, Alexander Graham, 21Bell, Chichester, 21Bell, Thom, 212, 213, 214Bell Laboratories, 75Bells of Joy, 101Belz, Carl, 3Benatar, Pat, 294Benjamin, Benny, 158Bennett, Boyd, 128Bennett, Tony, 64, 68, 128
Benson, Al, 78Benson, George, 211Berkeley, Busby, 36, 37Berlin, Irving, 24–25, 29, 31, 36, 
37, 61
Berliner, Emile, 22Berlioz, 350Bernard, Al, 28Berne Convention Implementa-
tion Act of 1988, 420
Berry, Chuck, 5, 7, 8, 11, 83, 
95–99, 120, 136, 142, 144, 145, 146, 150–151, 164, 
166, 170, 234
Berry, Jan, 147Berry, Richard, 112Bertei, Adele, 266
Bertelsmann, 361, 452Best, Pete, 166Best Latin Rock/Alternative 
Grammy, 383
Best New Artist Grammy, 367BET. See Black Entertainment 
Television (BET)
Betts, Dickie, 232
B.G., 396
Biafra, Jello, 271, 353Bieber, Justin, 367, 412, 451, 
455–456
Big band era, 48Big Beat. See Rock ‘n’ roll
Big Bill Broonzy, 95Big Bill Hill, 78Big Boi, 405Big Bopper, 142, 232The Big Broadcast, 35Big Brother and the Holding 
Company, 183, 185
Biggie Smalls, 360, 393, 395, 
396, 398, 402, 404, 410
Big Pun(isher), 384
Big Tymers, 396Bikini Kill, 408Biko, Steven, 341Billboard magazine, 80, 139, 140, 
202, 370
Hot 100, 11, 118, 164, 282, 
389, 392, 400–401, 453, 456
jukebox hits, 56music categories, 9, 10Pop 100, 401–402race music term dropped, 10rap category, 345Video Rentals chart, 286Video Sales chart, 286
Bill Haley and His Comets, 81, 
84, 113
Billy Idol, 266, 289Billy J. Kramer and the Dakotas, 
165
Billy Ocean, 304Billy Ward and the Dominoes, 
100
bin Laden, Osama, 431, 434,  
439
Birdsong, Cindy, 157
Bitches with Problems, 342Bittan, Roy, 298BitTorrent, 428Bivins, Michael, 391Black, Bill, 116, 143Black, Cilla, 165Black, Clint, 350, 382, 434Black and Tan Fantasy, 54508  ROCKIN ’ OUTBlack artists. See African Ameri-
cans; Race; Racism
Blackberry, 446
Blackboard Jungle, 115Black capitalism, 212, 213
Black Entertainment Television 
(BET), 288, 356
Black Eyed Peas, 439, 447Blackface minstrelsy, 1, 8, 16–20Black Flag, 269, 370, 378Blackmore, Ritchie, 206, 237, 
238, 240
Black Noise (Rose), 318
Black Oak Arkansas, 234
Black Panther Party, 172, 181, 
191, 192–193
Black Patti, 46Black Rob, 393Black Rock Coalition, 331Black Sabbath, 199, 235–236, 
237, 240, 241, 319, 351, 380, 406
Black Swan, 46, 48, 55, 56Blackwell, Bumps, 91, 103Blackwell, Chris, 224, 266, 303Blackwell, Otis, 118
Blade, Richard, 288Blades, Rubén, 272, 310, 384Blake, Arthur “Blind,” 46Blake, Peter, 206Bland, Bobby, 88Bland, James, 20Blasters, 310Blas Vasquez band, 112Blendells, 175Blige, Mary J., 390, 392, 393Block, Martin, 62Blondie, 252, 253, 255, 257, 258, 
266, 267, 271, 283, 336
Blood, Sweat, and Tears, 182Bloom, Luka, 437Bloomfield, Michael, 72, 160, 
182, 183
Blossoms, 153Blow, Joe, 307Blow, Kurtis, 334Blue Belles, 157Bluebird label, 58Blue Cheer, 235Blue-eyed soul, 153Blue Network, 32
Blue Note, 411Blue Öyster Cult, 241, 263Blue Ridge Entertainers, 52Blues Breakers, 167, 182–183Blues music. See also Rhythm 
and blues (r&b)
birth of, 43–47blues rock, 182–183categorizataion of music and, 
40–43
Chicago scene, 95–100influence on rock ‘n’ roll, 47on the radio, 54
style and terminology, 43–44Tin Pan Alley and, 6, 26, 
27–28
white musicians in, 167
The Blues Project, 182
BMG, 364, 418, 423, 452BMI. See Broadcast Music In-
corporated (BMI)
Bob B. Soxx & the Blue Jeans, 
153, 154
Bobby Day. See Byrd, Robert
Bob Marley and the Wailers, 
224. See also Marley, Bob
Bobo, Willie, 181Bob Seger and the Silver Bullet 
Band, 249
Bob Wills and His Texas Play-
boys, 52, 54, 114
Bo Diddley, 83, 95, 136, 196Body Count, 377, 378Bogart, Neil, 277Bolan, Marc, 243Bolden, Buddy, 47Bolder, Trevor, 244Bomb Squad, 341, 344, 396
Bonds, Gary “U.S.”, 135, 148Bone Thugs-N-Harmony, 396Bonham, John, 235, 374Bon Jovi, 325, 326, 327, 330, 431Bon Jovi, Jon, 326, 430Bono, 310, 431Boogie Down Productions, 313, 
340, 344
Boogie Woogie, 6Booker T. and the MGs, 172, 
173
Boomerang, 391Boomtown Rats, 307, 310Boone, Pat, 88, 128–129, 130Booth, Stanley, 196Boo Yaa Tribe, 346, 378Boris Karloff, 236Bostic, Joe, 79Boston, 248Boston Celtics, 394Boston College, 426Boston Globe, 295, 378Boston Tea Party, 201, 258Boswell Sisters, 35Bound for Glory (Guthrie), 159
Bowen, Jimmy, 122, 350Bowie, David, 198, 205, 243, 
244, 245, 253, 265, 289, 291, 412, 431
Boyd, Eva Narcissus, 134Boyd Bennett and the Rockets, 
128
Boy George, 289, 294Boyle, Susan, 415Boyz II Men, 390, 391, 392Boyz N the Hood, 340, 345Bozza, Anthony, 365Bracken, James, 99
Brackett, David, 9Braddock, Billy, 440Bradford, Perry, 44, 45Bradley, Owen, 67
Bradshaw, Tiny, 70Bragg, Billy, 312, 437, 440Bramlett, Bonnie, 268Brandy and Monica, 410Branson, Richard, 363Bratmobile, 408Braun, Carol Moseley, 356Braun, Scooter, 455–456
Braxton, Toni, 357, 390, 392
Break dancing, 333, 334Breakin’, 335B-Real, 346Brecht, Bertolt, 160Brenston, Jackie, 79, 83, 95Brewer, Teresa, 125, 128Brill Building pop, 137–138, 
153–155, 157
Brinkley, “Doc,” 61–62Brinsley Schwarz, 261British Broadcasting Corpora-
tion (BBC), 186, 210
British Gramophone, 23, 31
British invasion, 163–168British Phonographic Industry 
(BPI), 309
Broadcasting. See Radio
Broadcast Music Incorporated 
(BMI), 60–61, 140
Broadway Melody, 35Brockman, Polk, 40, 50Bromberg, David, 223Bronfman, Edgar, Jr., 361, 418Brooker and Clayton’s Georgia 
Minstrels, 20
Brooklyn Bridge, 110Brooks, Garth, 350, 359, 365, 
370, 381–382
Brooks and Dunn, 429Broonzy, Big Bill, 116Brother D and Collective Ef-
fort, 335
Brother Records, 198Brothers Four, 132Brown, Charles, 93, 94Brown, Chris, 447Brown, David, 179
Brown, James, 88, 103, 174–177, 
182, 191, 217, 272, 293, 331, 334, 335, 356, 357
Brown, Jerry, 230Brown, Nappy, 128Brown, Roy, 61, 82, 87–88Brown, Ruth, 72, 83, 84, 112Brown, Tom, 48Brown, Toni, 225Browne, Jackson, 199, 224, 230, 
231, 308, 310, 313
Brownstein, Carrie, 438Brown v. Board of Education, 149
Bruce, Jack, 167, 182Bruford, Bill, 208Brunswick, 50, 56, 127Bryant, Willie, 78
Brymn, Tim, 27Bubba Sparxxx, 400, 439Buckingham, Lindsay, 248Buddah, 215Buffalo Springfield, 185, 189, 
195, 229
Buggles, 289Burdon, Eric, 165, 169, 216
Burks, Spider, 78
Burleigh, Harry, 31Burnette, Johnny, 137Burning Spear, 266Burroughs, William, 234, 248Burton, Brian. See Danger 
Mouse
Burton, James, 137Burton, Ray, 222Bush, George W ., 384, 431, 
434, 436
Business as Usual, 31BusinessWeek, 451
Busta Rhymes, 398, 400Butler, Jerry, 99, 213Butterfield, Paul, 72, 182Butthole Surfers, 378Buziak, Bob, 303Buzzcocks, 261Byrd, Robert, 94Byrds, 159, 169–171, 181, 185, 
189, 195, 229, 421
Byrne, David, 257, 271, 314, 439Byrnes, Ed “Kookie,” 137
Cabrera, Víctor, 389
Cadet label, 71Cadillac Records, 410Cadillacs, 104, 105Café Tacuba, 383Cakewalk, 25Calderón, Tego, 389Cale, John, 252, 254, 258California Alliance for Survival, 
224
Callithumpian bands, 17Calypso music, 131–132Camelot Music, 350
Cameo/Parkway Records, 133, 
134, 135, 213
Campbell, Glen, 112, 231, 310Campbell, Luther, 396–397Cam’ron, 398Cannabis Action Network, 378Canned Heat, 182, 185Cannibal and the Headhunt-
ers, 175
Cannon, Freddy, 133, 134, 136Canterbury Tales, 349 SUBJECT  I NDE x  509Cantor, Randy, 385
Capitalism, 200, 316
black, 212, 213corporate, 441
Capitol-EMI, 199
Capitol Records, 66, 130, 132, 
143, 146
acid rock, 188Brother Records, 198formation of, 62mergers and acquisitions, 
199
rockabilly, 121, 122, 123, 127
surf music, 143, 145, 146
Top Ten hits, 85
Capote, Truman, 281Capricorn label, 233Captain and Tennille, 247, 349Carabello, Mike, 179Caraminica, Jon, 407Caravan, 211Cardinals, 104Carey, Mariah, 360, 362, 363, 
367, 391, 408, 430
Carlisle, Belinda, 313Carlton, Vanessa, 367, 410
Carmichael, Stokely, 171Carpenter, Mary Chapin, 382Carpenters, 247Carr, Leroy, 94Carr, Tim, 333Carroll, Ray, 78Cars, 382Carson, Fiddlin’ John, 41, 50Carter, A. P ., 51Carter, Asa, 123Carter, Dwayne Michael, Jr. See 
Lil’ Wayne
Carter, Jimmy, 233, 247, 250Carter, Maybelle, 228Carter, Rubin “Hurricane,” 229Carter, Sara, 51Carter, Shawn “Jay-Z,” 360Carter, Vivian, 99Carter Family, 51, 54Caruso, Enrico, 23Casablanca label, 276, 277Casey, Harry Wayne, 276Cash, Johnny, 120–121, 126, 
228, 429
Cashbox, 84, 202
Cash Money label, 396, 397,  
406
Cassette players, 286–287, 419, 
422
Cassotto, Walden Robert. See 
Darin, Bobby
Castelluccio, Francis. See Valli, 
Frankie
Castle, Irene, 29Castle, Vernon, 29Castor, Jimmy, 334Cat Butt, 373Catholic youth organizations, 
139
Cat Stevens, 223, 437
Cavern Club, 166Cayre, Joe, 276
Cayre, Ken, 276Cayre, Stanley, 276CBS (Columbia Broadcasting 
System), 33, 54, 57, 85, 199, 295
CBS Records, 188, 198, 199, 200, 
213, 292, 361
CD sales, decline in, 424
Cee-Lo, 384
Celler, Emanuel, 140Censorship, 139, 344–358Cerrone, Marc, 279Cervenka, Exene, 267Chad and Jeremy, 165Chad Mitchell Trio, 162Chambers, Iain, 7, 206, 211, 243Chambers, Lester, 440Chambers Brothers, 440Champs, 95, 112, 143, 175Chancellor label, 133Chance Records, 106
Chandler, Chas, 188Chandler, Gene, 99, 100, 148Chang, Jeff, 333, 437Chantays, 143Chanteurs sans Frontières, 310Chapel, Jean, 123Chapin, Harry, 223Chapman, Mike, 226, 257, 271Chapman, Tracy, 228, 311, 312, 
372
Chapple, Steve, 132, 143Charity rock, 306–316. See also 
Mega-events
Charlatans, 183, 205Charles, Ray, 10, 72, 83, 101–
102, 112, 135, 211, 268, 308, 411
Charlie Daniels Band, 232, 310Charms, 100, 109, 128Charnas, Dan, 395Charters, Samuel, 27, 40Chase, Charlie, 335Chasez, JC, 364Chaucer, Geoffrey, 349Chavis, Ben, 439
Checker, 71, 115Cheeba, Eddie, 334Cheep, 31Cheetah, 202Cheetah club, 242Cheiron Studios, 364Chemical Brothers, 443Cher, 281Cherry, Eagle Eye, 384Chesney, Kenny, 412Chess, Leonard, 10, 71, 95, 96Chess, Phil, 71Chessler, Deborah, 104
Chess Records, 10, 70, 71–72, 
78, 89, 95–96, 115, 199, 273
Chevrolet, 309
Chicago, 248Chicago Sun-Times, 392Chicago Tribune, 433Chicago Women’s Liberation 
Rock Band, 225
Chicano rock, 94–95, 112–113, 
143, 175–181, 336
Chiffons, 151, 154, 155
Chi-Lites, 191, 215
Chinn, Nicky, 226Chopin, 410, 411Chords, 72, 84, 105, 128Christgau, Robert, 167, 202, 
243, 249, 264, 282
Christian, Charlie, 83Christian, Meg, 227Christy Minstrels, 19Chrysalis, 198, 257Chubby Checker, 134–135Chuck D, 318, 341, 437Chudd, Lew, 88
Ciara, 401Ciccone, Madonna Louise. See 
Madonna
Cimarrons, 265, 266Cinderella, 330Circle Jerks, 269Circus (magazine), 318–319City blues, 43, 44Civil Rights Act (1964), 163, 
264
Civil rights movement, 197, 
212, 213
folk music and, 157–163girl groups and, 151–155integration and, 165Motown and, 155–157popular music and, 150–151southern soul music and, 
171–175
Civil War, 20Clanton, Jimmy, 89Clapton, Eric, 47, 167, 182, 183, 
189, 204, 205, 232, 235, 240, 265, 266, 384, 431
Clark, Dee, 99
Clark, Dick, 94, 136, 141–142, 
181
Clark, Petula, 167Clarke, Gene, 229Clarkson, Kelly, 401, 453, 454Clash, 259, 261, 262, 267, 380Class differences, 2, 6, 8, 9, 
17, 23
Classic blues, 43–44Clean Slate, 426Clear Channel, 389, 431–433Cleaver, Eldridge, 135Clef Club, 29–30
Cleftones, 106Clegg, Johnny, 312Clemons, Clarence, 298Cleveland, James, 101
Cleveland Cavaliers, 394Cliff, Jimmy, 266Cline, Patsy, 122Clinton, Bill, 355, 422Clinton, George, 273–274, 331, 
405
Cliquot Club, 34Clooney, Rosemary, 68, 84, 111, 
126
Clovers, 72Clowns, 89Club Grenada, 87–88C-Murder, 394Coalition for the Homeless, 378Coasters, 83, 106Cobain, Frances Bean, 377Cobain, Kurt, 371, 374, 376, 380, 
403, 408
Cochran, Eddie, 121Cocker, Joe, 193, 211Cohan, George M., 24, 25, 31
Cohen, Leonard, 223Cohen, Marshall, 288Cohn, Nik, 397Cold Crush Brothers, 335Coldplay, 458Cole, Cozy, 143, 144Cole, Natalie, 312Cole, Nat “King,” 64, 94, 101Cole, Paula, 409College Democrats, 378Collins, Bootsy, 274Collins, Judy, 219Collins, Phil, 291, 298, 305, 308Collins, Tim, 363Colon, Johnny, 178Color Me Badd, 390Colpix label, 132Colter, Jessi, 231Coltrane, John, 253Columbia Broadcasting System 
(CBS). See CBS (Columbia 
Broadcasting System)
Columbia Phonograph Broad-
casting System, 33
Columbia Phonograph Com-
pany, 21, 22, 33
Columbia Record and Tape 
Club, 199
Columbia Record Company, 76, 
122, 276, 362, 363, 376
acoustic recordings, 22
acquisitions and mergers, 
56, 57
Bessie Smith and, 44, 46calypso music, 131–132categorization of music, 43cover records, 128510  ROCKIN ’ OUTfolk music, 132
rock ‘n’ roll, 126–127, 130Tin Pan Alley and, 31
Columbus Day Riot, 64Colvin, Doug, 255
Colvin, Shawn, 408, 409Combo label, 128Combs, Sean “Puffy,” 357, 360, 
384, 390, 391, 393–394, 399, 402, 421. See also 
Diddy; Puff Daddy
Commercial broadcasting. See 
Radio
Commodores, 300Communications Act (1934), 33, 
60, 432
Communications Decency Act, 
432
Como, Perry, 64, 111, 125, 128, 
129
Compact disc (CD), 304. See also 
MP3
Compilation score, 303ComScore, 456Concepción, Tony, 385Congo Minstrels, 19
Congress on Racial Equality 
(CORE), 150
Conley, Arthur, 172, 212Conqueror Record Time, 55Conspiracy of Hope Tour, 311Continental Management Com-
pany, 364
Continentals, 104Converse, Inc., 394Cooder, Ry, 384Cook, Paul, 251Cook, Will Marion, 31Cooke, Sam, 8, 83, 102–103Cookies, 154Coon, Caroline, 259Coon songs, 9, 21, 23, 25, 51Cooper, Alice, 198, 242Cooper, Jack L., 62, 78Coors Beer, 349Copas, Cowboy, 66, 70Copeland, Miles, 268Copeland, Stewart, 268Copyright Act (1909), 29, 34, 60Copyright law, 420–422Coral label, 127, 128
Correll, Charles, 34Cosmic Force, 334Cosmopolitan Club, 96Costa, Don, 137Costandinos, Alec, 279Costello, Elvis, 261, 267Costello, John, 309Cotton, James, 72, 95Cotton Club, 48, 49, 54, 70Count Basie Orchestra, 49Counterculture movement
Altamont, 195–196commercialization of, 
184–189
counterculture as commod-
ity, 200–203
Monterey Pop Festival, 184, 
185, 186, 188–189
psychedelic rock, 182–184
radicals and riots, 190–193Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts 
Club Band and, 184–185
Woodstock, 193–196
Counter-Intelligence Program 
(COINTELPRO), 212
Count Five, 253Country (Tosches), 42Country and western (c&w), 41. 
See also Hillbilly music
audience of, 9black performers in, 10–11breakthrough of the 90s, 
381–383
country boogie, 70Grand Ole Opry, 55influences on rock ‘n’ roll,  
82
multicultural influences on, 
41, 56
popular music and, 381–383
post-WWII, 4, 65–68in radio and film, 54, 55rap/hip hop and, 359rockabilly, 113–123singing cowboys, 55–56southern boogie, 228–234in wars (Afghan and Iraq), 
433–437
women in, 412
Country Blue Grass and Blues 
(CBGB), 252, 253, 254, 255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 263, 264, 272
Country blues, 41, 43, 44Country Joe and the Fish, 183, 
185, 188, 194
Country rock, 228–234Coury, Al, 280, 286Cover records, 127–130Cowell, Simon, 386Cox, Ida, 44Cranberries, 408Crash, Darby, 258
Crawdaddy! magazine, 202Cray, Robert, 372Crazy World of Arthur Brown, 
207
Cream, 47, 167, 182–183, 199, 
235, 237, 306
Creative and Performing Arts 
High School, 391
Creed, 442Creed, Linda, 214Creedence Clearwater Revival, 
193, 230Creem (magazine), 202, 234, 254, 
318–319
Creme, Lol, 290
Creole Jazz Band, 48Crests, 111
Crew Cuts, 128Crickets, 121–122, 127Criss, Peter, 242Croce, Jim, 223Crocker, Frankie, 275Crofts, Dash, 112Crooning, 36Cropper, Steve, 173
Crosby, Bing, 13, 35–36, 64, 112, 
129, 140
Crosby, David, 166, 169, 189, 
194, 195, 218, 441
Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young, 
189, 195, 219, 229
Crosby, Stills & Nash, 189, 195, 
199, 224
Cross, Brian, 341, 346
Cross, Christopher, 393Crossover, 9, 139, 166, 305  
between heavy metal and punk, 327
Crossover Dreams, 272
Crow, Sheryl, 409–410, 422, 
430, 439
Crowe, Cameron, 376Crows, 84, 104, 112Crudup, Arthur “Big Boy,” 61, 
116
Cruz, Celia, 387Crystals, 13, 134, 148, 151–154, 
170
Cuba, Joe, 178Cuban Love Song, 37Cub label, 130Cugat, 
x
avier, 38, 111
Cultural and social issues. See 
also Charity rock; Coun-terculture movement; Mega-events
Beatles impact, 164censorship, 14–15, 346–358civil rights movement, 149–
151, 157–163, 171–175
Eisenhower years, 124–126feminism, 192, 193folk culture vs. high culture, 
2–3
immigration, 383, 387
Kent State shootings, 195marketing and, 8–11mass culture, 2–4, 16opposition to rock ‘n’ roll, 
140–141
popular culture, 3Satanism, 352sexual liberation, 192youth culture, 4–5, 317–318
Culture Club, 289Cummings, John. See Ramone,  
Johnny
Cumulus, 436
Currie, Cherie, 226Curtis Mayfield and the Impres-
sions, 191. See also May -
field, Curtis
Cylinder phonograph, 21
Cypress Hill, 346, 378, 387Cyrus, Billy Ray, 382, 433Cyrus, Miley, 415C/Z label, 373
Da Brat, 362, 396, 402
D’Acquisto, Steve, 275Daddy’s House, 396Daddy Yankee, 12, 388–389, 390Daft Punk, 443Dahl, Steve, 282Dale, Dick, 143, 145Dalhart, Vernon, 51Daly, Steven, 366Damned, 261, 262Damone, Vic, 64Dance Fever (tv program), 281Dance music, 29–30. See also 
Disco; Electronic dance 
music (EDM); Rap music
Dance Parade, 64Danforth, John, 348Danger Mouse, 445, 446Danko, Rick, 229Danleers, 128Dara, Olu, 398Darin, Bobby, 112, 123,  
133, 138
Darling, Eric, 159Darren, James, 132, 138, 143Dash, Damon, 398Daugherty, Jay Dee, 254Daughtry, Chris, 454Dave Clark Five, 164, 167David, Hal, 154Davies, Ray, 167, 205Davis, Angela, 344Davis, Clive, 188, 300, 384Davis, Mac, 223Davis, Miles, 210, 310Dawson, Jim, 81Day, Doris, 84, 126Dead Boys, 257, 258, 263
Dead Kennedys, 271, 353, 354, 
370, 372
Deadly Nightshade, 225Deadmau5, 450, 451Death Row Records, 357, 394Decca label, 85, 122, 123, 199
Bill Haley and, 130cover records, 128formation of, 57girl groups, 152military investments, 199 SUBJECT  I NDE x  511radio and, 63
rhythm and blues, 68–69rockabilly music, 114–115, 
121–123
rock ‘n’ roll, 127
Top Ten hits, 85
DeCurtis, Anthony, 362, 376Dee, Rubie, 335Dee, Sandra, 143Dee Dee Sharp, 134Deejays. See Disc jockeys 
 
(deejays)
Deep Purple, 199, 206, 236, 237, 
238, 319
Def Comedy Jam, 398Def Jam, 11, 337, 340, 342, 361, 
396, 398, 399
Def Jeff, 335Def Leppard, 319, 320, 325, 
373, 382
de Forest, Lee, 32, 33DeFries, Tony, 245Degrassi: The Next Generation 
(TV show), 406
Dekker, Desmond, 266DeKnight, Jimmy, 114
de la Rocha, Zack, 437, 441Delfonics, 213, 214Dells, 100Dell-Vikings, 109, 130Delmore Brothers, 70, 100Del-Satins, 109Delta Records, 78Del-tones, 143De Luxe label, 87, 109DeMann, Freddy, 386Democratic National Conven-
tion (1968), 203
Democratic Party, 285Denselow, Robin, 224Densmore, John, 190Denver, John, 231, 349Depêche Mode, 289Derek and the Dominoes, 232Destiny’s Child, 365, 384, 391, 
410, 429, 431, 447
Destri, Jimmy, 257De Sylva, Brown, and 
 
Henderson, 36
De Sylva, Buddy, 62Devastating Tito, 335
Devo, 258–259, 271DGC Records, 376Diallo, Amadou, 371, 438Diamond, Neil, 247Diamond Head, 319Diamond Multimedia’s Rio, 420Diamonds, 128Dianno, Paul, 319Dibango, Manu, 275, 310Dickinson, Bruce, 319DiCola, Peter, 445DiCrescenzo, Brett, 459Dictators, 263
Diddy, 393–394, 400. See also 
Combs, Sean “Puffy”; Puff Daddy
DiFranco, Ani, 408, 439
Diggie Doo, 77Digital Audio Home Recording 
Act of 1992, 420
Digital Millennium Copyright 
Act of 1998, 420, 425–426
Digital music. See Online music
Digital rights management 
(DRM), 428
Dimension label, 134Dinosaur, Jr., 372Dion, Celine, 12, 360, 392, 409, 
430
Dion and the Belmonts, 109Diplo, 446Dirty Dancing (film), 303Disc Jockey (store), 350Disc jockeys (deejays), 61–63, 
77–80, 81, 86, 96, 107, 124, 141–142, 275–276, 279
club, 272, 279
country music and, 62fast-talking, 77, 157first black deejay, 62first woman deejay, 62independent, 70, 77, 79independent radio and, 
77–80
as stars, 446–450
Disco, 8, 14
African American artists 
and, 212
avant-garde disco, 246black dance music and, 275Eurodisco, 8, 272–273, 279funk and, 272–275hard rock reaction to, 
282–284
mainstream, 279–282punk and, 247–284punk vs., 249–250
technology and, 6
Disco Magic (tv program), 281Disco Tex and His Sex-O-
Lettes, 272
Discothèque, 271
Discount Records, 199Disc recording, 22Dixie Chicks, 360, 409, 410, 430, 
434, 436–437
Dixie Cups, 154Dixie Hummingbirds, 101Dixieland Jas Band, 48Dixon, Charlie, 26Dixon, George Washington, 18Dixon, Luther, 151, 152Dixon, Willie, 71, 236DJ Clue, 397DJ Hollywood, 334
D.J. Jazzy Jeff & the Fresh 
Prince, 345
DJ Nelson, 388, 389DJ Playero, 388
DJ Premier, 398DJ Shadow, 443, 444DJ Terminator 
x
, 318, 341
DM
x
, 396, 398, 399
DNA, 266DOA, 269Dobson, James, 352Doe, John, 267
Doggett, Bill, 100, 143
Doherty, Dennis, 171Dokken, 321, 324Dolphin’s Hollywood Record 
Shop, 79
Dombai, Ryan, 406Domino, Fats, 48, 61, 79, 83, 88, 
89, 91, 93, 94, 128–131, 137, 150
Dominoes, 81, 101Donahue, “Big Daddy” Tom, 201Donegan, Lonnie, 166Donovan, 170, 181
Doobie Brothers, 224, 248Doors, 190–191, 306The Doors of Perception (Huxley), 
190
Doo wop, 8, 84, 104–111Dorsey, Jimmy, 49, 276Dorsey, Tommy, 49, 63, 64, 137Dorsey Brothers, 118Do the Right Thing, 314, 345Dot Records, 128Double Trouble, 334Douglas, Susan, 155Dovells, 134Dowd, Tom, 172Down Argentine Way, 37Downey, Thomas, 348Downhill Battle, 445Down home blues, 43Dozier, Lamont, 156–157, 158Drake, 406, 407Drake, Bill, 201Draper, Robert, 202, 203Dr. Dre, 336, 344, 355, 396, 397, 
400, 404, 429
Dreamgirls, 410, 454
Dresser, Paul, 23–24Dr. Feelgood, 259D.R.I., 327Drifters, 72, 101, 106, 112, 127, 
138, 151
DRM. See Digital rights man-
agement (DRM)
Drugs
Altamont concert, 196Beatles and, 169, 181Bob Dylan and, 169Brian Wilson and, 146Dion and, 109
disco and, 271Doors and, 191Ecstasy, 443Eminem and, 404
hip hop and, 337Jimi Hendrix and, 189New York Dolls, 251in 1960s music, 181–182, 192psychedelic, 200, 274rap and metal, 337, 348, 349, 
397–398, 399, 400
Sly Stone and, 195
Dubin, Al, 36Du Bois, W . E. B., 46Duets, 454Duke/Peacock, 70Duncan, Cleveland, 105Dupri, Jermaine, 396, 402, 429Duran Duran, 289–290Durante, Jimmy, 37Dusty Springfield, 166Dylan, Bob, 3, 47, 57, 159–163, 
169–170, 171, 185, 189, 191, 202, 224, 228–229, 248, 254, 306, 308, 310
Eagles, 199, 230, 231, 248
Earle, Steve, 434, 440Earth, Wind & Fire, 272–273, 
393
Eastman Kodak, 309Easy Rider, 234Easy Riders, 132Eazy E, 340, 341Ebony, 78, 165Eckstine, Billy, 71Economics. See also Marketing; 
Royalties
back catalog sales, 363, 462commodification of music 
industry, 60
copyright law, 420–422creativity and commerce, 
203–211
early phonographs, 21–23Great Depresssion, 31, 35, 
46, 54–56, 61
jukeboxes, 56, 59long tail market, 462–463
mergers and acquisitions, 56, 
57, 198–200, 360–361, 418
price cuts on records, 57sheet music, 20, 21youth market, 125
Ecstasy, 443Eddie and the Hot Rods, 259Eddy, Duane, 136, 144Edison, Thomas, 21, 22, 32Edison label, 51, 56EDM. See Electronic dance 
music (EDM)512  ROCKIN ’ OUTEdmunds, Kenneth “Babyface,” 
305, 390, 391
eDonkey, 428
Edsels, 104Ed Sullivan Show, 168, 191, 192
Edwards, Bernard, 282, 301Edwards, Jonathan, 223Edwards, Ricky, 107Eels, 263EFM Media Management, 4328 Mile, 404Eisenhower, Dwight D., 124–
126, 150–151
El Chicano, 178El Dorados, 99, 104, 130Electrical recording, 56. See also 
Record industry
Electric Circus club, 200Electric Eels, 258Electric Factory club, 201Electric Flag, 183Electric guitar, 5, 13, 54, 72, 99, 
143, 183, 321
The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test 
(Wolfe), 184
Electric Ladyland studio, 189
Electric Light Orchestra (ELO), 
381
Electronic dance music (EDM), 
386, 403, 442–444. See 
also Online music
copyright issues, 444–446disc jockeys (DJs), 446–450
Electronic Frontier Founda-
tion, 426
Electronic media. See Online 
music
Elegants, 105, 112Elektra Records, 190, 199, 220, 
252, 321, 363
El General, 387–388Elizabeth, Queen, II, 262Elliman, Yvonne, 280–281Ellington, Edward Kennedy 
“Duke,” 28, 31, 35, 48–49, 54, 57, 63, 126, 350
Elliot, Mama Cass, 171, 189Elliott, Missy “Misdemeanor,” 
362, 401, 402, 403, 409, 439
Emerson, Keith, 207
Emerson, Lake & Palmer, 198, 
201, 206, 207, 210, 211
EMI, 166, 295, 333, 360, 418, 
423, 445, 448, 462
Eminem, 396, 397, 399, 400, 
403–404, 439
Emmett, Dan, 18Emperor Jones, 54Enchanted Forest, 225Endino, Jack, 373Eno, Brian, 258, 259, 311Enterprise label, 217En Vogue, 390
Epic, 376Epitaph, 380Epstein, Brian, 163, 166, 168, 
280
Ercolani, James. See Darren, 
James
Erdelyi, Tom, 255
Eric B. & Rakim, 340Ertegun, Ahmet, 72Ertegun, Nesuhi, 72Esquerita, 90, 130Essex, 151
Estefan, Emilio, 384
Estefan, Gloria, 12, 383Estes, Sleepy John, 47E Street Band, 298, 310, 438Ethel Waters Show, 54Ethiopian Band, 19Eurodisco, 272, 279Europe, James Reese, 29–30, 48Eurythmics, 217, 289, 305Evans, Bill, 411Evans, Ernest. See Chubby 
Checker
Evans, Faith, 357, 393, 395
Evans, George, 24Eve, 402Everett, Betty, 99Everlast, 384Everly, Don, 122Everly, Phil, 122Everly Brothers, 122, 139Evers, Medgar, 159Excelsior, 94Exclusive, 94Exit Wounds, 399Exodus, 327Eyes, 225
Faber, Shane, 343
Fabian, 132, 133, 134, 136Facebook, 451, 455, 463Faces, 199Fagan, Donald, 248Fair, Lilith, 409Faith, Percy, 125, 281Falcons, 104Fame studios, 172, 173Family Education Rights and 
Privacy Act, 426
Famous Flames, 100, 103
Famous Ward Singers, 101Fania Records, 178Fanning, Shawn, 419Fantastic Five, 335Farina, Johnny, 144Farina, Santo, 144Farm Aid, 310, 313, 372, 442Farndon, Pete, 268Farrell, Perry, 377Fastbacks, 373Fatback Band, 335
Fat Boys, 336, 340Fatboy Slim, 443Fat Joe, 399Fat Mike, 439
Fats Waller’s Rhythm Club, 54FCC. See Federal Communica-
tions Commission (FCC)
Fear, 269Fearless Four, 335, 336Feaster, Carl, 105Feathers, 104Federal Communications Com-
mission (FCC), 33, 77, 85, 142, 201, 432–433
Federalism, 285Federal Trade Commission 
(FTC), 423
Federici, Danny, 298Feld, Steven, 314Felder, Don, 231Feliciano, José, 178Feminism, 192, 193Fender, Leo, 143Fender Guitars, 199Fergie, 390
Ferrer, Ibrahim, 384Ferry, Bryan, 245Fessenden, Reginald, 32Fichter, Morgan, 378Fiddle, 41Field recording, 46–47Fields, Danny, 252, 255Fifth Dimension, 13850 Cent, 360, 400, 404File sharing, 419, 421–429. 
See also Online music; Peer-to-peer (P2P) tech-nologies
Fillmore Auditorium, 200Film industry, 35–38, 54, 55–56Finch, Richard, 276Firmat, Gustavo Pérez, 37First Amendment, 352, 353, 354Fisher, Eddie, 125, 127Fisher, William, 420Fisk Jubilee Singers, 23, 41Fitzgerald, Ella, 63, 64, 71Five Blind Boys of Mississippi, 
101
Five Crowns, 106
Five Keys, 105Five Satins, 105Flack, Roberta, 217Flaming Lips, 440Flamingos, 104, 106, 109, 128, 
130
Flanders, Tommy, 182Flashdance, 303, 335, 336Flav, Flavor, 341, 355Fleetwood, Mick, 167, 248Fleetwood Mac, 167, 181, 183, 
248Fleetwoods, 104, 110
Fleischmann Yeast, 54Flipside, 378Flipside, Al, 378Flock of Seagulls, 289
Flores, Danny, 112Flying Burrito Brothers, 229Flying Down to Rio, 37FM multiplexing, 201FM rock radio, 198, 201Focus on the Family, 352Foghat, 248, 249Folk culture, 2–3
Folk music, 66, 132, 157–163
Folk rock, 162, 169–171Follow the Fleet, 36Fong-Torres, Ben, 201Fontana, D. J., 119, 120Fontana, Wayne, 166Fontane Sisters, 128Footlight Parade, 36Footloose, 303Forbes, 394The Force MDs, 336Ford, Frankie, 89, 123Ford, Gerald, 247
Ford, Lita, 226–227, 240, 324, 
332
Ford, Mary, 84, 125Forman, Murray, 396Forrester Research, 424Forte, Fabiano. See Fabian
42nd Street, 36Forty-Second Street Harlots, 
243
Foster, Stephen, 19–20Four Knights, 104Four Seasons, 100, 110Four Tops, 156, 292Four Tunes, 104Fowley, Kim, 226–227Fox, Jackie, 226Foxx, Charlie, 219Foxx, Inez, 219Foxx, Jamie, 401Foxy Brown, 393, 398, 402Frampton, Peter, 247Francis, Connie, 84, 132, 134, 
138
Francis, Sage, 438Franconero, Concetta. See Fran -
cis, Connie
Frank, Thomas, 200
Frankie Lymon and the Teenag-
ers, 106, 111
Franklin, Aretha, 57, 138, 173, 
191, 192, 199, 211, 217, 221, 232, 300, 305, 453
Franklin, Irma, 183Franklin, Kirk, 392Frantz, Chris, 257, 336Fraunhofer Institute, Germany, 
418 SUBJECT  I NDE x  513Free, 167, 240
Freed, Alan, 79–80, 96, 106, 136, 
141–142
Freedman, Max, 114Freeman, Bobbie, 112
Freeman, Charles, 354Freenet, 419Frehley, Ace, 242Fremantle North America, 452The Fresh Prince of Bel Air, 345Frey, Glen, 230Fricke, David, 377Friday Night Videos, 288
Frith, Simon, 4, 205, 249, 250, 
306, 313, 348
Frizzell, Lefty, 52, 65, 381
From First to Last, 450From Here to Eternity, 64From Spirituals to Swing, 57Frontera magazine, 387Frost, Kid, 336, 346FTC. See Federal Trade Com-
mission (FTC)
Fugazi, 270, 372Fugees, 402, 408Fuller, Simon, 452
Fundamentalist religious 
groups, 139
Funicello, Annette, 132, 133, 
134, 137, 143
Funkadelic, 274–275Funk Brothers, 158FunkDoobiest, 346Funky Four Plus One, 334Fuqua, Harvey, 109, 215Furay, Richie, 229–230Furious Five, 334, 336Furtado, Nelly, 411FuzzBubble, 397
G8, 316
Gaar, Gillian, 222, 228Gabler, Milt, 114–115Gabriel, Peter, 305, 311, 312Gaines, Cassie, 233Gaines, Donna, 377Gaines, Steve, 233Gaisberg, Fred, 22Gamble, Kenny, 212Gang Related, 357The Gang’s All Here, 37
Gangsta rap, 340, 356Gant, Cecil, 9Ganz, Jacob, 446Garcia, Jerry, 184Gardner, Kay, 227Garfunkel, Art, 170Garofalo, Reebee, 132, 143Garrett, Pat, 434Garrett, Peter, 310Garthwaite, Terry, 225Garvey, Marcus, 341Gates, Henry Louis, Jr., 354
Gay and lesbian
in discos, 271–272, 275, 443gender roles, 241rights movements, 197, 381, 
436
in rock music, 248
in women’s music, 227
Gaye, Marvin, 156, 157, 165, 
191, 212, 216, 219, 292, 402, 410, 429
Gay liberation movement, 275Gaynor, Gloria, 275, 279
G-Clef, 128
Geffen, David, 199, 229, 376Geffen Records, 313, 349Gehr, Richard, 328Geldof, Bob, 307, 308, 309, 313, 
316
Gender discrimination, 13–14, 
110, 155, 294. See also 
Women
Gender roles in music videos, 
294
Gendron, Bernard, 4, 204Gene and Eunice, 128
General Electric (GE), 32General Hospital (soap opera), 
384
Generation 
x
, 265, 266
Genesis, 206, 207, 210Genet, Jean, 245Genius (GZA), 397Gennett label, 58George, Nelson, 54, 69–70, 99, 
162, 172, 191, 213, 344, 396, 400
Georgia Yellowhammers, 51Gere, Richard, 313Germs, 269Gerry and the Pacemakers, 165Gershwin, George, 24, 28–29, 
31, 37, 61, 138
Gershwin, Ira, 138, 140Gertner, Nancy, 427Geto Boys, 396Ghostface Killah, 397, 439Gianquinto, Alberto, 179Gibb, Barry, 279. See also Bee 
Gees
Gibb, Maurice, 279. See also Bee 
Gees
Gibb, Robin, 279. See also Bee 
Gees
Gibbons, Billy, 233
Gibbs, Georgia, 103, 128Gibson, Debbie, 365Gibson, Don, 10, 122Gidget (film), 143Giger, H.R., 353, 354Gilkyson, Terry, 132Gill, Vince, 382Gillan, Ian, 238Gillett, Charlie, 4, 64, 66, 81, 
85, 96, 114, 126, 131, 
133, 151
Gillis, Gregg. See Girl Talk
Gilmore, Mikal, 249, 250, 359
Gilmour, David, 210Gimme Shelter (documentary), 
195
Ginn, Greg, 269Ginsburg, Arnie, 147Giraldi, Bob, 292Girl groups, 151–155Girlschool, 321
Girl Talk, 445–446
Gitlin, Todd, 171, 192Gladiolas, 112, 128Glaser, Tompall, 231Glass, Louis, 21Glazier, Mitch, 422Gleason, Ralph, 202, 204Globalization, 296Gloria Estefan, 365Glover, Henry, 71, 100Glover, Roger, 238Gnarls Barkley, 445Gnutella, 419
Godfrey, Arthur, 104Godley, Kevin, 290, 294Goffin, Gerry, 134, 138, 152, 
153, 220–221
Gold Diggers, 36Goldie and the Gingerbreads, 
225
Goldmark, Peter, 75–76The Gold Mine, 403Goldner, George, 105–106, 112Goldstein, Richard, 202Gomez, Selena, 412Goodie Mob, 396Goodman, Benny, 49, 57, 63, 64Goodman, Mark, 291Goodman, Shirley, 89. See also 
Shirley and Lee
Goodman, Steve, 223Good Neighbor policy, 36–38Good News, 36Goodwin, Andrew, 288–289, 324Google, 455Gordon, Mack, 37Gordon, Phil “Dr. Jive,” 79Gordy, Berry, 102, 151, 152, 
155–158, 165, 216, 274
Gore, Al, 316, 347, 348
Gore, Leslie, 134, 135Gore, Tipper, 347, 348Gorillaz, 445Gorme, Edie, 138Gortikov, Stan, 212, 348, 350Gosden, Freeman, 34Gospel Starlighters, 103Gotti, Irv, 399GQ (magazine), 405Gracie, Charlie, 132The Graduate, 170
Graham, Bill, 183, 200, 308Graham, Renée, 404Grammy Awards, 292Gramophone, 22
Granada TV , 259Grande Ballroom, 201Grand Funk Railroad, 237Grandmaster Flash, 333, 334, 
336
Grandmaster Flash and the Fu-
rious Five, 336
Grand Master Melle Mel and 
the Furious Five, 336
Grand Ole Opry, 55, 100, 229Grannan, Nancy, 351Grant, Eddy, 295Grant, Peter, 235, 240Graphophone, 21Grasso, Francis, 275Grateful Dead, 78, 183, 184, 
185, 188, 196, 198, 199, 201, 203, 204, 230, 233
Graustark, Barbara, 272Gravenites, Nick, 72Gray, Herman, 346
Gray, Macy, 367Gray, Tony, 341Greaser, 111Great Depression, 26, 31, 35, 46, 
54–56, 59
radio broadcasting and, 35
Green, Peter, 167, 183Green, Tony, 396Greenberg, Florence, 151–152Green Day, 379–380, 438Greenfield, Howard, 138Greenpeace, 313, 378Green River, 373Greenwich, Ellie, 138, 153–154Greenwood, Lee, 429, 433Greg Kihn Band, 295Gregory, Dick, 224, 356Grein, Paul, 304Grey Tuesday protest, 445Gridlock, 357Griffith, Nanci, 437, 440Grohl, Dave, 374, 376, 397Grokster, 424, 427–428Grossberg, Lawrence, 346Grossman, Albert, 220
GRT, 199Gruen, Bob, 251Grundy, Bill, 262Grunt Records, 198Guess Who, 234Guetta, David, 447–449, 451Guevara, Rubén, 95Guitar, 42. 
electric, 5, 13, 54, 72, 99, 143, 
183, 321
Guitar Player magazine, 240Guitar Slim, 90514  ROCKIN ’ OUTGulf and Western, 199
Gulf War, 378, 433Gulley, Brother Wilbur, 93G-Unit, 400Guns N’ Roses, 324, 331, 332, 
353, 370, 381
Guralnick, Peter, 101, 115, 118, 
173, 202
Gurewitz, Brett, 380
Guthrie, Arlo, 199, 296Guthrie, Woody, 157, 159, 160, 
161
Guy, 390
Guy, Buddy, 72
Guzman, Pablo, 283
Hagar, Sammy, 310, 320
Hager, Steven, 336Haggard, Merle, 181, 310, 381Hair (musical), 276Haley, Bill, 7, 81, 88, 95, 112, 
113–115, 127, 128, 130
Hall, Daryl, 308Hall, John, 224Hall, Roy, 52Hall, Stuart, 3
Hall and Oates, 291Hamill, Pete, 309Hamm, Charles, 6, 20, 24, 25, 
27, 39
Hammer, 345, 381Hammerstein, Oscar, 20, 64,  
140
Hammett, Kirk, 328Hammond, John, 57, 159, 223Hammond, John, Jr., 229Hammond, Tommy, 354Hampton, Fred, 195Hampton, Lionel, 71Hampton, Mike, 274Hancock, Herbie, 211, 313, 336Hancock, Hunter, 78Hand, Learned, 62Handgun Control, Inc., 378Handlin, Oscar, 3Handy, W . C., 27–28, 29, 55Hank Ballard and the Midnight-
ers, 100, 103
Hanna, Kathleen, 408Hanneman, Jeff, 327
Hansa label, 361Hanson, 365A Hard Day’s Night, 166Hardesty, Herb, 83, 88Hard Knock Life tour, 397Haring, Keith, 312Harlem Frolics, 44Harlem Music Shop, 79Harmonizing Four, 99Harold Melvin and the Blue 
Notes, 213
Harptones, 105, 111Harris, Charles K., 21, 23
Harris, Emmylou, 232, 381Harris, Marion, 28Harris, Oren, 141Harris, Thurston, 94
Harris, Wynonie, 61, 69, 71, 
82, 87
Harrison, George, 166, 185Harrison, Jerry, 258Harrison, Jimmy, 26Harrison, Wilbert, 148Harry, Deborah, 253, 257Hart, Lorenz, 31, 36, 138
Hart, Mickey, 184
Harvard Business School, 424Harvey, PJ, 408Hatchett, Molly, 234Hatfield, Bob, 153Hathaway, Donny, 217Havens, Ritchie, 194Hawaiian Eye, 137Hawkins, Coleman, 26Hawkins, Hawkshaw, 66, 70Hawkins, Ronnie, 229Hawkins, Screamin’ Jay, 127, 130Hawks, 229
Hay, George D., 55Hayden, Tom, 160Hayes, Isaac, 212, 217, 272Hays, Lee, 159Hazel, Eddie, 274Hazelwood, Lee, 136Headbangers’ Ball, 325Healy, Jack, 311, 312Heart, 240, 332Heartbreakers, 262Heavy D. & the Boyz, 340Heavy metal, 8, 234–242, 
317–333
categories of, 325–333censorship of, 346–358mysogyny in, 13, 318new wave, 319–322noise and, 318origins of, 234–235regulation of, 14sexism and, 240–241technology and, 317–318
Hebdige, Dick, 263Heilbut, Tony, 103Hell, Richard, 253–254
Hell’s Angels, 195–196Helm, Levon, 229Helms, Chet, 183Helms, Don, 67Henderson, Fletcher, 26, 28, 43, 
48, 49, 126
Henderson, Jocko, 77Hendrix, Jimi, 181, 183, 188–
189, 194, 196, 198, 235, 254, 274, 296, 318, 331, 373, 377, 429
Hendryx, Nona, 271Henley, Don, 230, 310, 422
Henry Rollins Band, 377–378Herald/Ember, 70, 105Herb Alpert and the Tijuana 
Brass, 175
Herbert, Victor, 29
Herman’s Hermits, 166Hernandez, Deborah Pacini,  
178
Herrera, Li’l Julian, 94–95Hershey, Gerri, 157Hetfield, James, 328Hicks, Taylor, 454
High culture, 2–3
Highwaymen, 132Highway QCs, 99Hilburn, Robert, 282Hill, Chippie, 44Hill, Faith, 382, 383, 430Hill, George Washington, 34Hill, Lauryn, 384, 402–403, 
408, 409
Hill, Raymond, 83Hill Billies, 50Hillbilly music, 39, 50–54, 56, 
66. See also Country and 
western (c&w)
Hillman, Chris, 169, 229
Hinckley, David, 152Hines, Earl, 54Hip hop, 8, 11, 12
African American influences 
in, 8
birth of, 333censorship of, 346–358DJs and, 333–337, 397–398rap music and, 390, 402–407r&b and, 389, 390–392second generation, 336–337
Hip Hop Summit Action Net-
work, 398, 439
Hippies. See Counterculture 
movement
Hispanic magazine, 387Hitsville USA studio, 155Hoboken Four, 64Hoes with Attitude, 342Hoffman, Abbie, 193Hogan, Carl, 83Holden, Stephen, 223, 271Hold Everything, 36
Hole, 377, 408Holiday, Billie, 57Holiday Inn, 36Holland, Brian, 156–157, 158Holland, Eddie, 156–157, 158Holland-Dozier-Holland, 156–
157, 158, 215
Hollies, 166, 195Hollings, Fritz, 348Holloway, Nicky, 442Holly, Buddy, 83, 121–122, 127, 
136, 142, 166, 232Hollywood “beach party” mov-
ies, 143
Hollywood Hills, 222
Hollywood Record Shop, 79Holzman, Jac, 190
Home video, 287Hondells, 144Honeydrippers, 94Honeyman-Scott, James, 268Hooker, John Lee, 47, 69, 81, 95, 
99, 191, 233
Hopkins, Al, 50Hopkins, Lightnin’, 47
Horne, Howard, 205
Hoskyns, Barney, 230Hot Band, 232Hot Boys, 396Hot Tracks, 288House, Son, 47House Committee on Interstate 
and Foreign Commerce, 141
House Judiciary Committee, 140House Judiciary Subcommittee 
on Intellectual Property, 422
House of Pain, 346
House Party, 345Houston, Cissy, 300, 410Houston, Penelope, 258Houston, Whitney, 300, 304, 
312, 360, 367, 392, 429
Howar, Pam, 353Howe, Steve, 208Howlin’ Wolf, 5, 47, 71, 95, 
182, 234
Hudson, Garth, 229Hudson, Jennifer, 454Hues Corporation, 275Huff, Leon, 212Huffstutter, P . J., 421Hullabaloo, 287Human Be-In Festival, 184Human League, 289Human Rights Now! Tour, 311, 
313
Humble Pie, 237, 247Hunter, George, 205Hunter, Ivory Joe, 61, 84, 100, 
130
Hunter, Meredith, 196
Hunter, Tab, 132Hurricane Katrina, 441Hurt, Mississippi John, 47Hüsker Dü, 269, 270, 372Husky, Ferlin, 122Hussein, Saddam, 434Huxley, Aldous, 190Hyacinth Foundation, 378Hyland, Brian, 135Hyman, Jeff. See Joey  
Ramone 
Hynde, Chrissie, 268 SUBJECT  I NDE x  515Ian, Janis, 191
Ice Cube, 340, 342, 344, 345, 
350, 378, 379, 397
Ice-T, 336, 342, 345, 355, 377, 
378, 404
Ienner, Don, 362
Iglesias, Enrique, 383, 430, 431Iglesias, Julio, 12, 305I Got the Hook-Up!, 394Iguanas, 252Imbragulio, Vincent. See Vin-
cent, Johnny
Immigration, 383, 387
Immortal Technique, 441
Impalas, 104, 130Imperial Records, 70, 88, 137Imperials, 104Impressions, 99, 162, 191Incredible Bongo Band, 334Independent labels
in Chicago, 99disco, 279and iTunes, 428in Los Angeles, 93–94rap, 327, 347rock ‘n’ roll, 124–138
in Seattle, 373technological advances 
and, 75
Independent radio, 77Inferno (Dante), 349Ingolia, Concetta. See Stevens, 
Connie
Inkatha Freedom Party, 315Ink Spots, 64, 104, 109, 118In Living Color, 345Inspectah Deck, 397Institute for the Study of Ameri-
can Religion, 353
Intelligent Black Woman’s Co-
alition, 342
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 
217
International Federation of the 
Phonographic Industry (IFPI), 286
International Sweethearts of 
Rhythm, 65
International Talent Manage-
ment (ITM), 155
Internet, 15, 286, 360, 364, 
418–419, 421, 423, 
425–427, 432, 437–438, 441, 445–447, 451–452, 455–456, 458, 462, 464
piracy on, 422–423teen pop and, 364as tool for music distribu-
tion, 429
Internet service providers 
(ISPs), 425–426
Interscope, 389Iommi, Tony, 236iPad, 428
iPhone, 428iPod, 419, 428, 429Iraq War, 417, 432–434, 436, 
437, 439, 440–441
Iron Butterfly, 236, 237
Iron Maiden, 319–320IRS. See Internal Revenue Ser-
vice (IRS)
Isis, 225Island Records, 224, 262, 455Isley Brothers, 135, 188, 215iTunes (Music) Store, 428–429
Iver, Bon, 406, 450
Ives, Burl, 144Ivy Queen, 389, 390
Jack Benny Show, 54
Jackson, Alan, 433Jackson, Brian, 224Jackson, Bullmoose, 69, 71Jackson, Chuck, 164Jackson, Curtis. See 50 Cent
Jackson, Janet, 304, 363Jackson, Jesse, 217, 356Jackson, Joe, 267
Jackson, John, 141Jackson, Li’l Son, 81Jackson, Mahalia, 101Jackson, Michael, 291–293, 296, 
304, 307, 308, 316, 325, 345, 362, 363, 370, 372, 373, 381, 386, 392
Jackson, Papa Charlie, 43, 46Jackson, Paul, 293Jackson, Wanda, 123Jackson 5, 216, 272, 291, 362, 
365
Jacquet, Illinois, 83Jadakiss, 439Jagger, Mick, 13, 167, 168, 196, 
220, 240, 242, 308, 431
Jaime label, 136Jakeman, Andrew, 261Jam, 380Jam, Jimmy, 305, 391Jamerson, James, 155, 158James, Elmore, 233James, Etta, 94, 103, 411James, Harry, 64
James, Mark, 343James, Rick, 291James, Skip, 47, 182James, Sonny, 122, 132James Gang, 237James Reese Europe’s Society 
Orchestra, 23
Jam Master Jay, 336–339, 400Jane’s Addiction, 370, 377, 378, 
379
Jardine, Al, 144Ja Rule, 390, 399, 400Jarvis, Al, 62
Javits, Jacob, 212Jay and the Americans, 135Jayhawks, 104Jay-Z, 11, 306, 362, 390, 392, 
396, 397, 398–399, 400, 
402, 405, 406, 410, 411, 431, 457
Jazz, 6, 25, 28–29, 41, 47–50, 69, 
87, 411
Jazz Hounds, 45The Jazz Singer, 35Jazzy Five, 334
J. C. Penney, 350
Jean, Wyclef, 386, 387, 402, 430Jefferson, Blind Lemon, 46, 
47, 120
Jefferson Airplane, 181, 183, 
184, 185, 188, 192, 194, 195, 196, 198
Jenkins, Harold. See Conway 
Twitty
Jennings, Waylon, 231, 232Jesus and Mary Chain, 378Jethro Tull, 198, 206, 210, 211Jett, Joan, 226–227, 332
Joan Jett and the  
Blackhearts, 332
Jewel, 408
Jewish Americans, 24–25J. Geils Band, 234, 294Jim Crow, 18, 41Jimi Hendrix Experience, 189, 
374. See also Hendrix, 
Jimi
Jive Records, 364, 396J&M Studio, 87Jobete Publishing, 155Jodeci, 390, 393Joel, Billy, 248, 308, 310, 430, 
431
Joe Liggins and the Honeydrip-
pers, 69
Joey Dee and the Starlighters, 
271
Johansen, David, 243
Johanson, Jai Johanny “Jaimo,” 
232
John, Elton, 198, 248, 306, 363, 
406, 431
John, Little Willie, 94, 100
Johnny and the Hurricanes, 144Johnny and the Moondogs, 166Johnny Maestro and the Crests, 
109–110, 111
Johnny Moore’s Three Blaz-
ers, 94
Johnson, Bill, 47Johnson, Brian, 319Johnson, Eldridge R., 22Johnson, Fred, 105Johnson, George Washington, 
22, 23Johnson, James P ., 48
Johnson, James Weldon, 31Johnson, Johnnie, 96Johnson, J. Rosamond, 31Johnson, Lyndon, 150, 171
Johnson, Pete, 88Johnson, Robert, 47, 67, 126, 
160
Johnson, Simone, 343Johnson, Willie, 5Jolson, Al, 31, 35, 36Jones, Ada, 23Jones, Brian, 167, 168
Jones, Casey, 42
Jones, Eddie. See Guitar Slim
Jones, George, 381Jones, Grandpa, 70Jones, Hettie, 173–174Jones, Jimmy, 130, 148, 219Jones, Jo, 50Jones, John Paul, 235Jones, Leroi. See Baraka, Amiri
Jones, Mick, 259, 437Jones, Norah, 367, 410, 411Jones, Quincy, 291, 293, 305, 307Jones, Simon, 452
Jones, Steve, 251, 262Jones, Vanessa, 403Jones Act of 1917, 30Jonkonnu festivals, 17Joplin, Janis, 8, 13, 182, 183, 185, 
188, 189, 192, 194, 196, 198, 211
Joplin, Scott, 25, 27Jordan, Louis, 68–69, 83, 114Jordan, Michael, 392Journey, 249Journeymen, 132Joy of Cooking, 225Jubilee Records, 85, 104Judas Priest, 237, 240, 319, 
324, 352
Judson, Arthur, 33Juice, 345, 357Jukeboxes, 56Just Blaze, 398Justin’s Restaurant, 396Justis, Bill, 143Juvenile, 396, 401
Kags Music, 103
Kaipo, Joe, 52Kalb, Danny, 182Kallen, Kitty, 84Kansas, 248, 249, 381Kantner, Paul, 195Kaplan, E. Ann, 325–326Karenga, Ron, 191Kassabian, Anahid, 464Kathrada, Ahmed, 312Katz, Steve, 182Kay, Neal, 319516  ROCKIN ’ OUTKaye, Lenny, 203, 253
Kaye, Sydney M., 140Kaye, Tony, 210KaZaA, 424, 427KC and the Sunshine Band, 276
KCMU radio, 373KDAY radio, 336Keene, Bob, 103Ke$ha, 415Keisker, Marion, 114Keith, Toby, 433–434, 436–437Keith-Albee theater chain, 20Kelly, R., 390, 392, 434
Kendricks, Eddie, 215, 308
Kenneally-Morrison, Patricia, 
218
Kennedy, John F ., 149, 163, 189Kennedy, Robert, 191, 203Kenny, Bill, 104Kentucky Boys, 51Keppard, Freddie, 47Kern, Jerome, 24, 36, 64Kerner Commission on Civil 
Disorders, 191
Kersands, Billy, 20Kesey, Ken, 184, 196
Keys, Alicia, 390, 392, 401, 405, 
410–411, 430
KFWB radio, 55Khan, Chaka, 224, 336Kid Frost, 336, 346Kid N Play, 345Kiedis, Anthony, 379Kinetic Playground, 201King, B. B., 47, 83, 88, 204, 234King, Ben E., 106, 112, 164, 306King, Carole, 134, 138, 152, 153, 
219, 220–221
King, Earl, 89, 90King, Kerry, 327King, Martin Luther, Jr., 150, 
159, 191, 203, 341
King, Rodney, 354, 355, 381King Biscuit Flour Company, 54King Biscuit Time, 54King Crimson, 207, 406King Curtis, 83King Records, 10, 66, 70–71, 
100, 109, 115
Kingston Trio, 132, 159Kinks, 167, 268
Kinney Corporation, 199Kiss, 242, 277, 321, 381Kitchener, Lord, 131Kizart, Willie, 95KJET radio station, 373Kleinbard, Annette, 110KLIF radio, 86Klout, 451KMET radio, 201, 283KMP
x
 radio, 201
Knight, Gladys, 100, 215, 306Knight, Marion “Suge,”, 357Knight, Terry, 237
Knopper, Steve, 364Knowles, Beyoncé, 391, 399, 
400, 407, 410, 415
Knox, Buddy, 122
Knuckles, Frankie, 442Kokomo, 144Kool and the Gang, 272, 273, 
304, 305, 335
Kool Herc, 333, 334Kool Keith, 342Kooper, Al, 160, 182, 233Kopkind, Andrew, 250, 275
Korn, 403, 451
Korner, Alexis, 167, 182Kornfeld, Artie, 193KOWH radio, 86KPRC radio, 55Kraftwerk, 344, 346Kragen, Ken, 307Kral, Ivan, 254, 257Kramer, Billy J., 165Kravitz, Lenny, 437Kreutzmann, Bill, 184Krieger, Robby, 190Kristal, Hilly, 251–252, 257
KRS-One, 340, 341, 398Krugman, Murray, 263Krugman, Paul, 433KSAN radio, 78, 201KSFA radio, 68Kurash, Damian, 455KVOO radio, 54K
x
LW radio, 78
K
x
OL-FM radio, 389
KYW radio, 62
Labelle, Patti, 157, 224, 410
La Bostrie, Dorothy, 90, 91Lady Antebellum, 415Lady Gaga, 14, 360, 407, 412–
415, 442, 451
Ladysmith Black Mambazo, 314LaFace Records, 390, 392, 396Lahara, Brianna, 426Laine, Frankie, 64, 66, 125, 126Lake, Greg, 207Lamb, Bill, 401Lambert, Adam, 453Landau, Jon, 202, 204, 205, 
223–224
Landis, John, 292
Lang, Michael, 193Lange, Robert “Mutt,” 319, 
320, 382
Langley, Jeff, 227Lanza, Mario, 118La Palina cigars, 33Larks, 104LaRocca, Nick, 48La Rock, Scott, 340, 341Last Poets, 335Latin Academy of Record-
ing Arts and Sciences 
(LARAS), 383
Latin Grammy organization, 
383
Latin(o/a) music(ians)
Chicano rock, 175–181
Cuban music, 178in hip hop, 337language barrier, 11–12music boom, 383–390and rock ‘n’ roll, 111–113salsa, 178
tango, 29
and Tin Pan Alley,  37–38
Latin Rascals, 337Latin Tropical Airplay, 388Latune, 37Lauper, Cyndi, 294, 296, 308Lavigne, Avril, 367, 411Lead Belly, 47, 61, 162Leadon, Bernie, 230Le Bon, Simon, 290Lecuona, Ernesto, 37–38, 113Ledbetter, Huddie. See Lead 
Belly
Led Zeppelin, 47, 167, 198, 
199, 210, 235, 236, 237, 
238, 240, 308, 309, 326, 374, 393. See also New 
Yardbirds
Lee, Brenda. See Tarpley, Brenda 
Mae
Lee, Leonard, 89. See also Shirley 
and Lee
Lee, Peggy, 63, 138Lee, Spike, 314, 345LEF Interactive, 427Leiber, Jerry, 94, 112, 151–152, 
153
Leiber and Stoller, 106, 112, 
118, 119
Lennon, John, 166, 185, 186–
187, 191, 192, 195, 205, 429, 431
Lennon, Julian, 308Lennox, Annie, 217, 289, 294Lesbian and gay. See Gay and 
lesbian
Lesh, Phil, 184Leslie Speakers, 199
Les Misérables (musical drama 
film), 384
Lester, Richard, 166Levan, Larry, 275, 443Levinson, Nan, 346, 347Levy, Adam, 411Lewis, Huey, 308Lewis, Jerry Lee, 48, 70, 83, 
93, 100, 115–116, 120, 136, 142
Lewis, Meade Lux, 88Lewis, Rudy, 106Lewis, Smiley, 88, 89, 128
Lewis, Terry, 305, 391Li, Jet, 399Liberty Belles, 44Liberty Records, 350
Library of Congress, 47, 71Liggins, Joe, 93, 94Lightfoot, Gordon, 199, 223Lightnin’ Rod, 335Lil’ Bow Wow, 396Lil’ Jon, 392, 401Lil’ Kim, 393, 397, 402Lil’ Wayne, 386, 396, 406, 407
Limbaugh, Rush, 432
Limeliters, 132LimeWire, 428Limp Bizkit, 403, 430Lindh, John Walker, 434Linkin Park, 442Linna, Miriam, 264Lipsitz, George, 69, 82–83, 316Listen to the Lambs (Otis), 94Literary Digest, 24Little Caesar and the Romans, 111Little Esther, 94Little Eva, 134
Little Nipper, 22Little Richard, 48, 83, 86, 88, 
90–93, 94, 103, 129, 130, 142, 150, 164, 165, 166, 188
Little Steven, 310.  See also Van 
Zandt, Steven
Little Walter, 115Live 8, 316Live Aid, 306, 308, 309, 310, 
311, 313, 316
Live Earth, 316Live music
in digital era, 457–458vs. recorded music, 61–63
Live Nation, 457–458Living Colour, 372, 377, 378Living Single, 344, 345L.L. Cool J, 337, 340, 341, 398Lloyd, Richard, 252, 254LoCascio, Phil, 438Lockwood, Robert, 54Loft, 275Logan, Karen, 351Lohr, Steve, 361Lollapalooza tour, 372, 377, 378
Lomax, Alan, 47, 71, 444Lomax, John, 47Lombardo, Dave, 327London Festival Orchestra, 206London SS, 259Lone Star Rangers, 55Long tail marketing, 462–464Lont, Cynthia, 227Lopes, Lisa “Left Eye,” 391Lopez, Jennifer, 383–384, 386, 
393, 399, 415
Lopez, René, 178 SUBJECT  I NDE x  517Lopez, Trini, 159, 162
Lord, Jon, 206, 237, 238Lorenz, George “Hound Dog,” 
78, 86
Lorenzo, Irv. See Gotti, Irv
Los Fabulosos Cadillacs, 383
Los Lobos, 12, 113, 314Louis Armstrong Show, 54Louisville Jug Band, 52Love, Courtney, 377, 408Love, Darlene, 153Love, Mike, 144, 348, 349Love, Monie, 343, 344
Love, Preston, 94
Love Me Tender (film), 118Love Unlimited, 217Lovin’ Spoonful, 170, 171Lowe, Nick, 261Lox, 393, 397Lucky Millinder Orchestra, 82Ludacris, 392, 396, 401, 404, 
405, 455
Lukather, Steve, 293Luman, Bob, 117Luny Tunes, 389, 390Lush, 378
Lydon, John, 251Lydon, Michael, 197, 202Lymon, Frankie, 128, 203Lynch, George, 324Lynn, Loretta, 310, 411Lynyrd Skynyrd, 232, 233, 381, 
434
Lyrics
bilingual, 178censorship, 346–358, 
431–433
Dylan and, 159–161minstrel, 17–18, 26occult-style, 241Parents Music Resource 
Center (PMRC) and, 317, 348–349, 350, 351, 352, 353, 357
rap, 344Recording Industry Associa-
tion of America (RIAA) and, 348
sexual, 101–102, 115, 128, 
139–141
socially relevant, 157
Lysergic acid diethylamide 
(LSD), 183
Lyte Funky Ones (LFO), 365
Mabon, Willie, 95
Macan, Edward, 207Machito’s Afro-Cubans, 38, 111Mack, Cecil, 31Mack, Greg, 336MacKaye, Ian, 270Mac Miller and Wale, 462Macomba, 71
Macon, Uncle Dave, 55Maddox, Rose, 123Mad magazine, 199Madonna, 14, 294, 300–302, 
305, 308, 348, 353, 363, 
368, 373, 386, 409–410, 412, 437–438, 442, 457
Magazines. See specific Maga-
zine
Magoo, 396Maguire, Martie, 437Mahavishnu Orchestra, 211
Maid of Harlem, 45
Makeba, Miriam, 162, 315Make Believe Ballroom, 62Malcolm 
x
, 163, 341
Mallette, Pattie, 455Malmsteen, Yngwie, 321Malo, 181Malone, Bill C., 41, 50, 56, 228, 
232
Malone, Noreen, 410Malopoets, 310The Mamas and the Papas, 171, 
185
Mammy Lou, 42
Maná, 383, 384Manchester, Melissa, 222Mancuso, David, 275Mandela, Nelson, 310, 312, 
313, 341
Mandela, Winnie, 341, 344Mandolin, 42Manfred Mann, 166Mangione, Chuck, 211Manilow, Barry, 247Mann, Barry, 138, 153–154Mann, Herbie, 281Mann Act, 99, 142Manuel, Rich, 229Manzarek, Ray, 190Mapplethorpe, Robert, 254MAPS. See Minimum adver-
tising price programs (MAPS)
March, Little Peggy, 135Marchan, Bobby, 89Marconi, Guglielmo, 31Marco Pirroni, 261Marcucci, Bob, 133
Marcus, Greg, 185Marcus, Greil, 7, 83, 104, 117, 
164, 185, 202, 308
Mardi Gras parades, 87Mardin, Arif, 279Marine Band, 24Marketing
categorization of music and, 
8–9, 39–40, 43, 85, 206
cross-media, 296, 302gender discrimination and, 
13–14language and, 11–12
MTV and, 288–289race and, 8–11record pools and, 281YouTube and, 456
Marketts, 143
Marks, E. B., 37, 61Marley, Bob, 224, 266, 402Marsh, Dave, 202, 206, 253, 282, 
313, 350
Marshall, 317–318Marshall Field and Company, 62Marshall Tucker Band, 232, 233
Martha and the Vandellas, 151, 
156, 157, 158
Martin, Dean, 64, 118
Martin, George, 5, 166, 185, 
186, 203
Martin, Janis, 123Martin, Linda, 139, 324–325Martin, Miss Halloween, 62Martin, Ricky, 12, 383, 384, 390Martin, Sarah, 44Martin, Max, 364Martinez, Eddie, 337, 338Martino, Al, 64
Marvelettes, 148, 151, 156, 158Marvin and Johnny, 128Marx, Karl, 264Mase, 393, 398Masekela, Hugh, 188, 310, 315Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT), 426
Mass culture, 2–4, 16Masta Killa, 397Master P , 396, 397, 400, 402Mastrangelo, John, 110Matassa, Cosimo, 87, 91Matassa’s studio, 87–89, 90Matchbox Twenty, 384Mathis, Johnny, 103, 127, 138Matlock, Glen, 251, 262Matsushita, 361Matthews, Dave, 384, 430, 437, 
439, 442
Maximum Rock ‘n’ Roll (fanzine), 
380
Max’s Kansas City, 252May, Derrick, 443Mayall, John, 167, 182, 248Mayfield, Curtis, 99, 162, 191, 
212
Mays, Willie, 78
MC5, 191, 192, 252MCA label, 349, 360McCarthy, Joseph, 66, 124, 132, 
141
McCartney, Paul, 25, 166, 185, 
186–187, 247, 292, 305, 308, 421, 429, 431
McClary, Susan, 347McCoy, Van, 275McCreery, Scotty, 454McCullom, John, 351
McCutcheon, John, 437McDaniels, Darryl, 336McEntire, Reba, 382, 437McGhee, Brownie, 162
McGhee, Stick, 72McGraw, Tim, 382, 383McGuinn, Jim, 169, 171McGuinn, Roger, 421McGuinness, Paul, 462, 463McGuire, Barry, 170, 171, 434McGuire Sisters, 128M.C. Hammer. See Hammer
MCing, 334McKenzie, Scott, 185McKernan, Phil, 78McKernan, Ron “Pigpen,” 78, 
184
McKinney, Devin, 166McLachlan, Sarah, 409McLaren, Malcolm, 251, 252, 
262, 263–264
McLaughlin, John, 211McLendon, Gordon, 86McLeod, Kembrew, 445McLuhan, Marshall, 308
MC Lyte, 342McManus, Declan Patrick. See 
Costello, Elvis
McNeely, Big Jay, 69, 83McPhatter, Clyde, 83, 101, 138McRae, George, 275, 276MC Ren, 397McTell, Blind Willie, 47McVie, Christine, 248McVie, John, 167, 248Medley, Bill, 153Megadeth, 327Mega-events, 306, 309–316Meisner, Randy, 230Melanie, 194Melle Mel, 336Mellencamp, John, 310, 313, 
431, 437
Mellers, Wilfred, 203Melloman Ace, 346Mello-Tones, 106Melnick, Jeffrey, 431Melody Maker, 183, 259Melton, J. Gordon, 353Meltzer, Richard, 241
Memphis Horns, 172Memphis Recording Service, 
115
Men at Work, 289Mercer, Johnny, 62Mercer, Ron, 394Mercer Art Center, 243Merchant, Natalie, 408Mercury, 66, 109, 199Mercury, Freddie, 205Mercury News, 424Mercury Records, 128518  ROCKIN ’ OUTMergers and acquisitions, 198–
200, 360, 361–363
Merry Pranksters, 184
The Merry Widow, 36Messina, Jim, 229
Metallica, 327, 328–329, 330, 331, 
333, 335, 370, 421, 432
Method Man, 397, 398Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer 
(MGM), 35, 68, 127, 199
Metzger, Tom, 353Metzke, Gustave, 206MFSB (Mother Father Sister 
Brother), 213
MGM. See Metro-Goldwyn-
Mayer (MGM)
M.I.A., 446Miami Sound, 276Mia 
x
, 394, 402
Michael, George, 305Michel, Prakazrel “Pras,”, 402Michigan Womyn’s Music Fes-
tival, 227
Mickey Mouse Club, 364Microsoft’s Windows Media 
Player, 423
Middle East, 439
Middleton, Richard, 6Midler, Bette, 224, 247Midnighters, 134Midnight Oil, 310, 313Mighty Sparrow, 131Mighty Three Music, 213Milburn, Amos, 69, 93, 94Miles, Buddy, 183Miley, Bubber, 48Miller, Glenn, 49, 281Miller, Jim, 202, 213Miller, Kiri, 455Miller, Mitch, 126Miller, Neville, 61Miller, Percy “Master P ,” 360, 
394. See also Master P
Miller, Rice, 54Miller, Steve, 183, 185, 188Millinder, Lucky, 70Millington, June, 225Mills, David, 355Mills Brothers, 35, 64, 104Milton, Roy, 69, 93, 94Minaj, Nicki, 407, 412, 415, 447
Mind-altering drugs, 146Mindbenders, 166Minimum advertising price pro-
grams (MAPS), 423
Ministry, 378Minnesota Mining and Manu-
facturing Company (3M), 75
Minor Threat, 269, 270Minstrelsy. See Blackface Min-
strelsy
Mintz, Leo, 79Minutemen, 269, 270, 372
Miracles, 155, 156, 164, 165, 
215. See also Robinson, 
Smokey
Miranda, Carmen, 37
Miro, Jennifer, 258Mirrors, 258Misogyny, 13, 318Mississippi Sheiks, 51Misty, 265Mitchell, Guy, 68, 122Mitchell, Joni, 195, 198, 199, 
218–219, 221, 402
Mitchell, Mitch, 188Mitch Ryder and the Detroit 
Wheels, 153
Mizell, Jason, 336Mo B. Dick, 394Moby, 443–444Moby Grape, 183Modern label, 70, 99, 128Modern Lovers, 258Mojo-Navigator R&R News, 202Molly Hatchett, 232Molotov, 383Monroe, Bill, 65, 116
Monroe, Vaughn, 64, 127Monson, Ingrid, 41Montana, Vince, 276Monterey International Pop 
Festival, 184, 185, 186, 188–189
Montez, Chris, 175Moody Blues, 165, 206, 211Moon, Keith, 235, 374Mooney, H. F ., 6Moonglows, 109, 128, 215Moore, Mandy, 365Moore, Melba, 282Moore, Scotty, 5, 116, 120Moore, Sonny, 450M.O.P ., 398Morali, Jacques, 277Morello, Tom, 440, 441Morgan, Jane, 84Morganfield, McKinley. See 
Muddy Waters
Morissette, Alanis, 408, 
409–410
Moroder, Georgio, 273, 276–
277, 279
Morpheus, 424, 427
Morris dancing, 17Morrison, Jim, 190–191, 196Morrison, Junie, 274Morrison, Sterling, 252, 253Morrison, Van, 199, 211, 296Morse, Dave, 205Morse, Steve, 295, 408, 409Morton, George “Shadow,” 154Morton, Jelly Roll, 47Moshing, 327Moss, Jerry, 175Moten, Benny, 50
Mother Love Bone, 376Mothers of Invention, 199, 206Motion Picture Association of 
America (MPAA), 424
Mötley Crüe, 321, 324, 325, 
330, 363
Motörhead, 241, 319, 321, 330
Motown, 155–157, 291, 391Motown 25, 292Mottola, Tommy, 362Mott the Hoople, 245Moulton, Tom, 279
Mouseketeer, 367
MP3, 418–429MP3.com, 420–421MP4, 428MPAA. See Motion Picture 
Association of America (MPAA)
Mraz, Jason, 412Mr. Lif, 439Ms. magazine, 199
MTV , 287–295, 317, 324–325, 
429
broadcast rights, 288
creation of, 287, 288expansion, 288growth of, 288–289heavy metal, 318–319heavy metal, growth of, and, 
324–325
launching, 288New Romantic movement 
and, 289
People magazine on, 290–291racial exclusion by, 291–292, 
294
racism, 290–291rap music on, 344, 405youth culture and, 317, 318
MTV Unplugged, 362, 377, 386MuchMusic, 313Muddy Waters, 5, 47, 71–72, 78, 
83, 95, 96, 182, 234
Muggs, Grandmixer, 346Mugwumps, 171Mulcahy, Russell, 290Muldaur, Maria, 222Mullican, Moon, 66, 70, 100, 
120
Multimedia stardom, 451–456. 
See also Online music; 
Social media
idol worship, 452–454YouTube, 454–456
Mummer’s plays, 17Murder, Inc., 386, 399, 400Murdoch, Rupert, 451, 452Murphy, Dudley, 54Murphy, Eddie, 391Murray, Anne, 231Murray, Charles Shaar, 194, 296Musical Clock, 62
Musical Majority, 349Musical theater, 31Musicians United to Win With-
out War (MUWWW), 
439
Music industry. See Recording 
industry
MusicNet, 423Music Row Democrats, 440Music videos, 285–295, 289
British, 289gender roles in, portrayal 
of, 294
objectification of women 
in, 294
visual dimension of, 347YouTube and, 456
Muslim, 431Mussorgsky, 350MUWWW . See Musicians 
United to Win Without War (MUWWW)
My.MP3.com, 421MySpace, 455MySpace Music, 451
Mystics, 112Mystikal, 396
NAACP . See National 
 
Association for the Advance-
ment of Colored People (NAACP)NAB. See National Alliance of 
Broadcasters (NAB)
Naked Lunch (Burroughs), 234, 
248
Nappy Roots, 400Napster, 419, 420, 421–424, 428, 
445, 458. See also Online 
music
Nas, 398Nash, Graham, 166, 189, 194, 
195, 218, 441
Nash, Johnny, 266Nashville Network (TNN), 381Nathan, David, 344Nathan, Syd, 10, 70–71, 100,  
115
National Abortion Rights 
 
Action League, 378
National Academy of Record-
ing Arts and Sciences 
(NARAS), 383
National Alliance of Broadcast-
ers (NAB), 33, 61–63
National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), 63, 126, 150, 356
National Association of Broad-
casters (NAB), 60–61 SUBJECT  I NDE x  519National Association of Televi-
sion and Radio Announc-
ers (NATRA), 212
National Barn Dance, 55National Broadcasting Company 
(NBC), 32–33, 288
National Council of Negro 
Women, 356
National Federation of Music 
Clubs, 14
National Front, 259, 264, 265, 
267
National Life and Accident In-
surance Company, 55
National Organization for 
Women (NOW), 192
National Political Congress of 
Black Women (NPCBW), 
356
National Rainbow Coalition, 356National Records, 72Nazario, Ednita, 384NBC. See National Broadcasting 
Company (NBC)
NC-17, 394Ndegéocello, Meshell, 409, 437
N’Dour, Youssou, 310, 311, 312Neal, Bob, 117Neal, Mark Anthony, 392Near, Holly, 227Neely, Kim, 370Negroni, Joe, 111Negus, Keith, 393Neil, Vince, 324Nelly, 404Nelson, Havelock, 356Nelson, Jeff, 270Nelson, Prince Rogers. See 
Prince
Nelson, Ricky, 89, 133, 134, 137Nelson, Sandy, 144Nelson, Willie, 12, 231, 305, 
310, 430, 441
NEMS, 280Neptunes, 366Nessen, Charles, 427Neuman, Molly, 408Nevius, Sally, 347, 352New Christy Minstrels, 159New Haven Women’s Liberation 
Rock Band, 225
New Jack City, 345
New Kids on the Block,  
364, 365
Newman, Randy, 199, 223New Musical Express, 268New Order, 289New Orleans, 26, 41, 43, 47–48, 
53, 87–93
New Riders of the Purple Sage, 
230
New Romantic movement, 289News Corporation, 451, 452Newsted, Jason, 330, 351
Newsweek, 170, 224Newton, Ernie, 67Newton, Wayne, 384Newton-John, Olivia, 294
New Yardbirds, 235. See also Led 
Zeppelin
New York Dolls, 243, 251, 321New Yorkers Against Violence, 
430
New York Fire Department, 429New York Times, 126, 306, 361, 
364, 378, 405
Nickelback, 442, 457Nicks, Stevie, 248Night Flight, 288Night Tracks (radio program), 
288
Nikki D, 342, 3489/11 attacks, 14–15
corporate radio and new pa-
triotism after, 431–433
country music and, 433–437guitar-based rock and, 464music industry, economic ef-
fects of, 417–418
popular music and, 417, 
429–434
Nine Inch Nails, 377, 378
The Nine Rings of Wu-Tang 
(comic book), 397
19 Entertainment, 4521984 (Orwell), 2591910 Fruitgum Company, 27798 Degrees, 365Ninja, Willi, 302Nirvana, 370, 371, 373, 374, 376, 
377, 379–380, 403
Nitty Gritty Dirt Band, 228Nitzsche, Jack, 143Nixon, Richard, 124, 192Nobody Beats the Wiz, 356No Doubt, 365, 408No Electronic Theft Act of 
1997, 420
NOF
x
, 439
Noise, 318No Limit Films, 394No Limit label, 394, 396, 397No Limit Sports Enterprises, 
394
Non-English hits, 12
No Nukes (series of concerts), 
224
N.O.R.E., 388North American Phonograph 
Company, 21
North Carolina Ramblers, 50Northern Lights, 309–310The Notorious B.I.G.,  357, 393, 
395, 397. See also Biggie 
Smalls
Nova Express (Burroughs), 234Novoselic, Krist, 374, 376
No Way Out tour, 397Nuchow, Leslie, 437Nugent, Ted, 237, 248Numan, Gary, 289
Nuns, 258Nuridin, Jalal, 335Nutcracker (ballet), 144Nutmegs, 105The Nutty Professor, 398N.W .A. (Niggas With Attitude), 
336, 340, 341, 344, 355, 370, 396
Nyro, Laura, 185
Oakenfeld, Paul, 442
Oakley, Berry, 232Oates, John, 308Obama, Barack, 441Obscenity, 347, 354O.C., 335Occupy Wall Street movement, 
441
Ochs, Phil, 162, 192O’Connor, Billy, 257O’Connor, John J., 352
O’Connor, Sinéad, 409O’Day, Anita, 63Odetta, 162Offspring, 380Ohio Express, 277Ohio Players, 272, 273O’Jay, Eddie, 215O’Jays, 213, 215OKeh Record Company, 40, 
44, 127
OK Go, 455Olatunji, 181Ol’ Dirty Bastard (ODB), 
397–398
Oliver, Joe “King,” 47Olivia Records, 227Omar, Don, 12, 389Omega Equities, 199Once Upon a Time (opera), 277O’Neill, Eugene, 54O’Neill, Mattie. See Chapel, Jean 
112 (rap group), 393, 395101ers, 259Online music. See also Internet; 
Social media
legislation and litigation, 
420–422
legitimacy, 418
MP3 and, 418–420music distribution and, 
429–431
music labels and, 423–429piracy and theft, 422–423social networking sites  
and, 451
On the Avenue, 36Opera, 17
Operation Shock and Awe, 436Orbison, Roy, 120, 122,  
123, 228
Original Creole Band, 47
Original Dixieland Jass Band 
(ODJB), 28, 48
Original Lockers, 334Orioles, 84, 85, 101, 104–105, 
128
O’Riordan, Delores, 408Orlando, Tony, 178Orloff, Katherine, 222
Orlons, 134
Orpheum theater, 20Orwell, George, 259Osborne, Joan, 408, 409Osbourne, Ozzy, 236, 241, 321, 
324, 331, 351, 352
Osbourne, Sharon, 332Osmond, Donny, 349Osterberg, James. See Iggy Pop
Otis, Johnny, 61, 93–95Our Common Future, 313Outkast, 396, 401, 405, 438Outlets, music video, 288
Owens, Dana, 343Oxford, “Jumpin’” George, 78
Pablo, Petey, 401
Pace, Harry, 46, 48Pace & Handy Publishing Com-
pany, 46
Pachucos, 112Pacific Stereo, 199Pacini Hernandez, Deborah, 387Packard, Vance, 141Page, Jimmy, 183, 235, 236, 393Page, Patti, 84, 86, 105, 125, 410Paice, Ian, 238Paid in Full, State Property (TV 
film), 398
Paley, William S., 33, 57Palladium, 111Palmer, Carl, 207Palmer, Earl, 87, 88, 90Palmer, Robert, 28, 72, 82, 83, 
174, 270, 294, 305
Palmieri, Eddie, 224Paramount, 35, 46, 62, 199
Pareles, Jon, 342, 353Parents Music Resource Center 
(PMRC), 317, 346–357
Paris, 439Paris Sisters, 110Parker, Charlie, 67Parker, Graham, 261Parker, Maceo, 274Parker, Tom, 117Parliaments, 274–275, 277Parris, Fred, 105Parrish, Maxfield, 205520  ROCKIN ’ OUTParrot label, 128
Parsons, Gram, 229, 232Parton, Dolly, 232, 281Partridge Family, 365Pat Boone, 151
Patrick, Sharon, 361Patriotism, 32 , 417, 428, 429, 
431–437
Patti Smith Group, 254Patton, Charlie, 47Paul, Les, 5, 75, 84, 125Paul, Sean, 390, 410Paul and Paula, 135
Paul Revere and the Raiders, 181
Paul Whiteman Orchestra, 
31, 35
Pavitt, Bruce, 373Payne, Rufus. See Tee Tot
Payola, 20P . Diddy. See Combs, Sean 
“Puffy”
Peace movement, 437–441Peacock Records, 90, 101Peaks, Anthony, 343Pearl Jam, 370, 376, 378, 379, 
429, 438, 440
Pearlman, Lou, 364
Pearlman, Sandy, 263Pebbles, 390Peel, John, 262Peer, Ralph, 44, 47, 50, 51, 61Peer-to-peer (P2P) technologies, 
419, 424–428, 444, 455. See also File sharing; On-line music
Pelicans, 104Penguins, 84, 104, 128Penis Landscape, 353Penniman, Richard. See Little 
Richard
Penny, Hank, 70, 71Pentangle, 167People, 290–291People for the Ethical Treat-
ment of Animals (PETA), 378, 454
Peppermint Lounge, 271Pepsi, 309, 363, 366Pepsodent toothpaste, 34Pere Ubu, 258, 263Perfect, 397
Perkins, Carl, 11, 46, 86, 116, 
120, 126, 136
Perren, Freddie, 279Perry, Joe, 337Perry, Katy, 407, 415Perry, Linda, 367Perry, Richard, 225Perry, Steve, 83Personal computers, 419PETA. See People for the Ethical 
Treatment of Animals (PETA)Peter, Paul, and Mary, 159–160, 
162
Peter and Gordon, 165
Peters, Steve, 352Peterson, Charles, 373
Peterson, Richard, 66, 86Peter York, 246Petrillo, James C., 62–63Pet Shop Boys, 440Pettinicchio, Darlyne, 352Petty, Norman, 121, 122Petty, Tom, 224, 429, 430, 431Phair, Liz, 408
Pharrell, 401
Philadelphia International 
 
Records (PIR), 198, 213
Philadelphia Sunday Dispatch,  
17
Phillinganes, Greg, 293Phillips, 199, 304Phillips, Dewey, 116–117Phillips, John, 185Phillips, Sam, 95, 113, 115, 116, 
120, 121, 123, 133
Philly Groove Records, 213Phonographs, 21–23
Pianos, 21Picariello, Frederick. See Can-
non, Freddy
Pickett, Wilson, 172, 173, 175, 
212, 232
Pickwick Records, 252Pierce, Webb, 65Pilgrim Travelers, 101, 103Pink, 367, 405, 407, 411, 415, 
440
Pink Floyd, 198, 207, 210, 211Pink Panther, 334Pips, 100, 215Piracy and theft, 422–423Pirate Bay, 427, 428Pitbull, 386Pitchfork, 406, 446, 459Pitney, Gene, 134Pitofsky, Robert, 423Pittman, Barbara, 123Pittman, Robert, 287, 288, 295Plant, Robert, 235, 241Plastic Ono Band, 192Platters, 83, 109Pleasure Seekers, 226
Pleiades, 227PMRC. See Parents Music 
 
Resource Center  
(PMRC)
Poco, 229, 231Poetic Justice, 356, 357Poindexter, Buster. See David 
Johansen
Pointer Sisters, 302, 304Poison, 324, 330Poleman, Tom, 389Police, 267, 268, 393Politics. See also Counterculture 
movement; Cultural and 
social issues
Afghanistan war, 433, 438antinuclear movement, 224
Black Panther Party, 172, 
181, 191, 192–193
censorship and, 346–358civil rights movement, 
149–151, 171–175
Democratic National Con-
vention, 192
Eisenhower years, 124–126
Fascism, 263–265
hip hop and, 398Iraq War, 436, 437, 439, 
440, 441
Lollapalooza and, 377–379protest music, 437–438Public Enemy and, 340–345Reagan’s election, 285unrest of 1968-1969, 
192–193
Vietnam War, 124, 171, 181, 
192, 194, 196
Polydor, 262
Polygram, 295, 360, 361, 376Pomus, Doc, 138Pond, Steve, 198Poneman, Jon, 373Poole, Charlie, 50, 51Pop, Denniz, 364Pop, Iggy, 245, 252Pop Idol, 452Poppers, 271Popstars, 452Popular music
Africanization of, 175, 215, 
217
Beatles and, 163–164categories of, 9Civil Rights Movement and, 
150–153
country and western (c&w) 
and, 381–383
development of, 1–2forms of, 6–7mainstream, 390and mass culture, 2–4power, and protest after 
9/11, 429–430
racism and, 11
regulation of, 14–15, 
346–353
rock ‘n’ roll impact on, 
139–140
television promoting, 287U.S., influence on Latin, 111women in, 13, 226, 408–416
Porcaro, Jeff, 293Porgy and Bess, 29Porter, Cole, 31, 37, 61, 349, 350Posey, Sandy, 192Possessed, 327
Powell, Enoch, 265Powell, Maud, 14Powell, Maxine, 155Powers, Ann, 405, 412
Prado, Perez, 111Premiers, 175Presley, Elvis, 7, 13, 65, 68, 83, 
84, 88, 116–120, 127, 130, 133, 136, 137, 143, 166, 315
Presley, Gladys, 116Presley, Lisa Marie, 291
Presley, Vernon, 116
Pressplay, 423Preston, Johnny, 162Pretenders, 257, 267, 268, 409Price, Lloyd, 79, 83, 89, 90, 130Price, Sam, 40Pride, Charlie, 10Prince, 291, 296–297, 304, 345, 
348, 363, 373, 410, 429
Prine, John, 223Priority label, 341Priority Records, 370Procol Harum, 198, 210
Proctor, F . F ., 20Prodigy, 443Professor Griff, 341, 342Propes, Steve, 81Pruett, Sammy, 67Pryor, Richard, 217Psychedelic drugs, 200Psychedelic Stooges. See StoogesPsycho, 413Psychographics, 288PTA (Parent/Teacher Associa-
tion), 348
Public Enemy, 313, 314, 318, 
340–345, 396, 438
Puente, Tito, 111, 112, 181Puerto Ricans, 111, 122, 360, 
365, 384, 387-389, 397
Puff Daddy, 342, 343, 357, 360, 
393, 395, 396, 397, 398. See also Combs, Sean “Puffy”; Diddy
Punk
vs. art rock, 8, 206–207
Bowie and, 245CBGB groups, 253–257
vs. disco, 249–250
Fascism and, 263–265in Great Britain, 259–263pop, 377–380protest music, 437–438reggae and, 265–267Rock Against Racism, 
265–267
violence and, 261–263as white noise, 250–252
Punk Rock Festival, 261Punkvoter, 439 SUBJECT  I NDE x  521Purple Rain, 296–297
Puttin’ on the Ritz, 36Pyramids, 143
Quarrymen, 166
Quatro, Suzi, 226Queen, 412Queen label, 70Queen Latifah, 342, 343, 344, 
345, 402, 409
Queen of Tejano Music, 383? & the Mysterians, 175
Quicksilver Messenger Service, 
183, 185, 188
Quiet Riot, 321, 324, 325
Quinn, Martha, 309
Race. See also African Ameri-
cans; Civil rights movement; Racism
categorizataion of music and, 
40–43
marketing and, 8–11rockabilly music and, 123rock ‘n’ roll and, 139tensions, 191
Race music, 39, 66. See also Blues 
music
Race records, 47
Racism
anti-disco campaigns and, 
282–283
in heavy metal, 318Jim Crow, 18, 41Latin music and, 11–12MTV and, 290–291, 294, 300in punk, 265–267in rock ‘n’ roll, 150
Radio
African Americans in,  
54–55
Album-Oriented Rock 
(AOR), 202, 240, 283, 295, 324
AM, 201, 202black, 341, 345, 356chain owners, 86commercial development of, 
31–35
corporate, 431–433country music on, 54, 55
disc jockeys, 61–63, 77–80FM broadcasting, 76–77FM rock, 198, 201formula, 62hip hop on, 400–402, 407live vs. recorded music on, 
61–63
network vs. independent, 77
protest music, 437rap music on, 324, 399revenues, 60–61technological advances, 
75–76
Top Forty, 86, 153, 154, 
157, 158, 159, 160, 163, 
166, 175
Radio Act (1927), 33
Radio Corporation of America 
(RCA). See RCA
Radiohead, 458–462Radio-Keith-Orpheum (RKO), 
35
Raekwon the Chef, 397Rage Against the Machine 
(RATM), 371, 432, 450
Ragtime, 6, 25–27, 29Raiders, 181Rainey, Gertrude (Ma), 44, 47Raitt, Bonnie, 13, 222, 224, 296, 
310, 312, 409
Raitt, John, 222Ram, Buck, 109Ramone, Joey, 255, 263Ramone, Johnny, 255Ramones, 252, 253, 254, 255–
257, 260, 263, 264
Rampling, Danny, 442
Rampling, Jenni, 442Rancid, 380Rand, Ayn, 237Raney, Wayne, 70Ranks, Shabba, 388Rap music. See also Hip hop
in the 90s, 344–345African American influences 
in, 11
antiwar music, 438–439censorship of, 346–358gangsta rap, 340, 356, 390, 
394, 396, 398
hip hop and, 390, 402–407mysogyny in, 13old school, 332–336, 
333–336
regulation of, 14–15second generation, 336–338sexism in, 342technology and, 317, 318violence in, 318, 325, 327, 
342, 343, 344, 346, 348, 349, 350, 352, 354, 355, 394, 398, 403
Rascals, 191. See also Young Rascals 
Ratt, 321–324Raven, 319Ravens, 104Rawls, Lou, 188Ray, Johnny, 127RCA, 85, 198, 199, 295, 360, 
361, 367
beginnings of, 32–33calypso music, 131–132cover records, 128globalization, 295gospel music, 103
heavy metal, 332Jefferson Airplane and, 188LP records and, 76mergers and acquisitions, 
56, 188
New Orleans style music, 90
Presley on, 130rock ‘n’ roll music, 127Top Ten hits, 85women’s music, 236
RCA Photophone, 35RCA Victor, 90
Ready Steady Go! (TV show), 165
Reagan, Ronald, 285, 298, 309Reagon, Bernice Johnson, 150Rear Window, 413Rebels, 136, 144Record Industry Association of 
America, 15
Recording Artists Coalition, 422Recording industry
acquisition and mergers, 
56, 57, 198–200, 360, 361–363
back catalog sales, 363, 462
Beatles impact, 164calypso music, 131–132categorization of music, 
39–40
censorship, 346–358commodification of, 60copyright law, 420–422, 424cross-racial successes, 
305–306
disc jockeys, 61–62downloads, 424, 428film fusion, 303folk music, 132formative years, 21–24future of, 371–372, 456–464Great Depression era, 56–57independent labels and, 
84–85, 198
infrastructure expansion, 
200–203
late 60s, early 70s, 157, 175, 
198–201, 247, 361
mainstream 70s and 80s, 
250–251
MP3 and, 418–422, 428
radio and, 31–35rock ‘n’ roll vintage years, 
126–130
technological advances, 59, 
286–287
Tin Pan Alley years, 29–31trends and promotions, 452
Recording Industry Association 
of America (RIAA), 212, 348, 420–422
Clean Slate, 426MP3.com and, 420–421on music sales, 456–457
Napster and, 421–422
Record pools, 276Record Rendezvous, 79Record World, 350
Record World, 202Redding, Noel, 188Redding, Otis, 172, 188, 212Reddy, Helen, 192, 222Red Hot Chili Peppers, 370, 
378, 379
Red Label classical record-
ings, 23
Redman, 397, 398Red Network, 32Red Seal classical recordings, 23Redwood Records, 227Reed, Blind Alfred, 441Reed, Jimmy, 95, 99Reed, Lou, 245, 246, 252, 312Refugee Project, 402Refuse and Resist, 378Reggae, 265–268, 270–271, 387, 
402, 443
Jamaican, 267, 387Misty and, 265
Rock Against Racism (RAR) 
and, 265–267
Reggaeton music, 12, 360, 
386–390, 387–390
Reid, Antonio “L.A.”, 305, 390, 
392
Reid, Vernon, 331, 372Reisman, David, 125R.E.M., 363, 372, 378, 437René, Leon, 94Reno Club, 50REO Speedwagon, 249Reprise label, 199Revere, Paul, 181Revilot label, 274Revolution, 296Reyes, Rico, 179Reynolds, Debbie, 84Reynolds, Simon, 443Reznor, Trent, 378Rhapsody, 463Rhapsody in Blue, 29Rhoads, Randy, 321, 330, 331Rhodes, Bernie, 259Rhodes, Todd, 70, 79
Rhodes Pianos, 199Rhythm and blues (r&b)
chart discontinuance, 10, 165Chicago scene, 95–100Cincinnati scene, 100crossover, 9, 139, 166disc jockeys, 77–79, 77–80gospel and, 101–103independent labels and, 
68–73
influence on rock ‘n’ roll, 
81–83522  ROCKIN ’ OUTmarketing of, 9–10
r&b/hip hop, 390–392, 
401–403
uptown, 151, 152
Rhythm Orchids, 122
RIAA. See Recording Industry 
Association of America (RIAA)
Rice, Thomas Dartmouth,  
18, 19
Rich, Charlie, 120Richards, Keith, 167–168, 199, 
254, 308, 431
Richie, Lionel, 295, 300, 304, 
307, 308
Richman, Jonathan, 258Ridarelli, Robert. See Rydell, 
Bobby
Riffs, 328Righteous Brothers, 138, 153Rihanna, 442Riley, Boots, 417, 440Riley, Teddy, 390, 399Rimbaud, Arthur, 254Rimes, LeAnn, 382, 408Ringo Starr, 166
Riot Grrrl, 408Rip Chords, 144Riperton, Minnie, 224Ripoll, Shakira Isabel Mebarak. 
See Shakira
Rising to the Challenge, 349,  
351
Ritter, Tex, 55Rivers, Jerry, 67Riviera, Jake. See Jakeman, 
Andrew
RKO. See Radio-Keith-Orpheum 
(RKO)
Roadwork, Inc., 227Robbins, Marty, 122Roberts, John, 193Roberts, John Storm, 29, 178Roberts, Luckey, 48Robertson, Robbie, 229Robeson, Paul, 54Robey, Don, 101Robins, 104, 106Robinson, Dave, 261Robinson, Glen, 432Robinson, Smokey, 155, 157, 
158, 165, 185, 201, 215, 
349. See also Miracles
Robinson, Sylvia, 335Robinson, Tom, 266Robyn, 446Roc-A-Fella, 396, 398, 399, 
405–406, 445
Rockabilly music, 11, 113-123, 
127
Rock Against Racism (RAR), 
265–267
The Rocket (newspaper), 373Rocket from the Tombs, 258, 
263
Rockets, 128
Rock Goddess, 321Rockin’ Dopsie, 314
Rock ‘n’ roll. See also Disco; 
Heavy metal; Punk
acid rock, 182–184African American aesthetic 
in, 7–8
art rock, 203–211beginnings of, 126–127blues influence on, 47
blues rock, 182–183
Brill Building pop, 153–155, 
157
British invasion, 163–168censorship, 346–358charity rock, 306–309Chess Records and, 71Chicago scene, 95–100Chicano rock, 175–181civil rights movement and, 
171–175
conservative reactions to, 
14–15
country rock, 228–234
cover records, 127–130doo wop, 104–111folk rock, 162, 169–171Freed and, 79girl groups, 151–155glam/glitter rock, 242–246jazz rock, 210–211Latin influences, 82, 95, 
111–113, 181
Los Angeles scene, 93–95mass culture and, 3–4, 16mega-events, 309–316Motown, 155–157multicultural influences on, 
82–84
New Orleans style, 87–93new wave, 257, 266, 267–271post-9/11, 429–431progressive rock, 204, 206punk and, 207reactions to, 124–126resurgence of, 442schlock rock, 132, 134–135skiffle music, 166, 168
soft rock, 218–224southern boogie, 228–234, 232superstars, 295–306surf music, 142–148technology and, 4–6Tin Pan Alley and, 2, 6–7trash rock, 251women in, 13–14, 225–228youth culture and, 4–5, 
317–318, 317–319
Rockola, 56Rock Steady Crew, 335Rock the Vote, 378
Rockwell, John, 306Rocky IV (film), 217Rodgers, Jimmie, 42, 51–54, 
66, 68
Rodgers, Nile, 282, 301
Rodgers, Paul, 240Rodgers, Richard, 31, 138Rodríguez, Pete, 178Rodriguez, Tito, 111, 112Rogers, Ginger, 37Rogers, Kenny, 232, 300, 307, 
308, 310
Rogers, Nile, 305Rogers, Roy, 56Rogers, Will, 32Rogers Drums, 199Rolfe, B. A., 34Rolie, Gregg, 179Rolling Stone, 147, 198, 202–204, 
210, 213, 235, 251, 254, 307, 331, 334, 348, 359, 365, 370, 371, 372, 377, 379, 393, 398, 405, 408, 432
Rolling Stones, 12, 47, 72,  
164, 165, 167–168, 175, 
181, 192, 195, 199, 201, 240, 243, 248, 253, 259, 281, 308, 363, 440,  
457
Rollins, Henry, 269, 378Romans, 111Romeo and Juliet, 349Romeo Must Die, 399Ronettes, 13, 151, 152–154Ronny & the Daytonas, 144Ronson, Mick, 244Ronstadt, Linda, 12, 222, 230, 
248, 315
Rooftop Singers, 159Roosters, 99Roots, 440Rosa, Robi Draco, 385Rosa Parks, Rosa, 150Rose, Axl, 331Rose, Fred, 61, 67, 68Rose, Tricia, 318Roseland Ballroom, 48Rosenman, Joel, 193Ross, Diana, 12, 156–157, 158, 
215, 304, 305, 308
Ross, Steve, 199
Rosso, Wayne, 426Roth, David Lee, 240, 320, 323, 
326
Roulette Records, 122, 199Rounder Records, 225Rowland, Kelly, 391, 447Roxio, 428Roxon, Lillian, 170Roxy Music, 245Royal Sons, 103Royalties
ASCAP and, 31, 34, 60–61
of Carole King, 220Copyright Law of 1909, 29on early recorded music, 22
Keen Records and, 103from live performances, 29McCartney and, 421Nirvana, 376‘N Sync, 364Paul Simon’s South African 
recordings, 315
piracy and theft, 422
Presley’s contract and, 117
Wonder and, 216
RSO, 281, 286Rubin, Rick, 330, 337Ruby and the Romantics, 151Rudolph, Larry, 366Ruffin, David, 215, 308Ruff Ryders, 396, 398, 402Rumba, 37Rumble, John W ., 100Rumour, 268Runaways, 226, 240, 332Run-D.M.C., 309, 310, 328, 
336, 337, 338, 340, 341, 
398, 400
Rupe, Art, 89–90, 93Rural blues, 43Rush, 237, 248Rush Associated Labels, 357Rushing, Jimmy, 50Rydell, Bobby, 132, 133, 134, 
136, 148
RZA, 397
Sabino, Rob, 301
Sadler, Barry, 171, 434Sadler, Eric “Vietnam,”, 341Sahm, Doug, 178Sainte-Marie, Buffy, 162, 228Sakamoto, Kyu, 12Saldana, Francisco, 389Sales. See also Economics; Royalties
in the 1970s, 247–248, 295in the 1980s, 286, 287, 295in the 2000s, 424, 432alternative music, 370–373American Idol and, 452, 453, 
454
back catalog, 363, 432
black music, 173country music, 51, 229, 231, 
350
disco, 281–282electronic dance music, 403heavy metal, 324hip hop, 463international, 295–296Latin music, 360MTV and, 353 SUBJECT  I NDE x  523music album, women and, 
407
music downloads and, 424
rap music, 345, 353, 390, 391of records, 55, 56–57, 62, 63, 
86, 164
rhythm and blues, 390
rock ‘n’ roll, 126sheet music vs. recordings, 21
singer-songwriters, 442, 450superstars, 295–306teen pop, 364–365, 411–412by women, 407–409
Salsa, 178, 384, 387SalSoul label, 276SalSoul Orchestra, 276Salt-N-Pepa, 340, 342Sam and Dave, 172Sambora, Richie, 430Sam Cooke, 135, 162–163, 171, 
219
Sam Goody, 356Sam the Sham & the Pharaohs, 
175
Sands, Tommy, 122, 132Sane, Justin, 438
San Francisco, 8, 200, 201, 202, 
204, 205, 210, 227
San Francisco Chronicle, 202, 409Sanjek, Russell, 20, 29, 60, 126, 
136
Santamaría, Mongo, 178Santana, Carlos, 12, 179, 181, 
194, 211, 383
Santangelo, Patricia, 426Santiago, Herman, 111Santiago, Maria Elena, 122Santos, Romeo, 390Sanz, Alejandro, 388SAR (Sam and Alex Records), 
103
Sarnoff, David, 32–33, 35, 56, 
76–77
Satanism, 352Satriani, Joe, 321Saturday Night Fever, 273, 279, 
280–281, 303
Saunders, Mike, 234Saunders, Wallace, 42Saunderson, Kevin, 443Savage, Jon, 251, 259, 265
Savoy, 70Saxon, 319Scaduto, Anthony, 169Scaggs, Boz, 183, 248Scales, 7Scepter label, 152Schicke, C. A., 23Schlock rock, 132, 134–135Schmidt, Timothy, 231Schoolly-D, 340Schuller, Gunther, 27Schumacher, Joseph, 437Schumann, 350
SCLC. See Southern Christian 
Leadership Conference (SCLC)
Scorpions, 324
Scott, Bon, 319Scott, Jill, 410Scott-Heron, Gil, 224, 335Screamers, 258Screaming Trees, 373, 379Scruggs, Earl, 228SDMI. See Secure Digital Music 
Initiative (SDMI)
Seagal, Steven, 399Seagram Co., 361Seal, 429Seale, Bobby, 196Seals, Arthur, 27Seals, Jim, 112Searchers, 165Sears, 350Sebastian, John, 171Seburg, 56Secure Digital Music Initiative 
(SDMI), 423
Security of the First World 
(S1W), 341
Sedaka, Neil, 134, 138
Seeger, Pete, 157, 159, 160, 161, 
162, 195
Seekers, 165Seger, Bob, 249Segrave, Kerry, 139, 325Segundo, Compay, 384Seldes, Gilbert, 27Selective Phonograph, 56Selena (biographical drama 
film), 383
Senate Committee on Com-
merce, Science, and Transportation, 348
Senate Committee on Interstate 
and Foreign Commerce, 141
Sen Dogg, 346, 387Sensations, 151September 11, 2001, terrorist at-
tacks of. See 9/11 attacks
Sermon songs, 99Seven Arts, 19975 Ark, 417
77 Sunset Strip, 137Sex (shop), 251Sexism, 294, 342Sex Pistols, 250–251, 259, 260, 
261–263, 264, 380
Sexuality, rock ‘n’ roll, 84Sexual liberation, 192SF
x
 Entertainment, 457
Shady/Aftermath label, 400Shaft, 212Shakespeare, William, 349Shakira, 384, 386, 388, 389, 
415, 457
Shakur, Tupac, 355, 356, 357, 
360, 393, 398, 400
Shangri-Las, 151, 154–155
Shank, Barry, 335Shankar, Ravi, 411Shannon, Del, 134Shanté, Roxanne, 342Shapiro, Peter, 277Sharkbait, 378Sharman Networks, 427Shaw, Arnold, 9, 11, 71, 93, 
114, 136
Shaw, Artie, 49, 55Shaw, Greg, 144, 202, 253Sheet music, 20, 21, 22, 29, 
37, 38
Sherman, Cindy, 412Shider, Gary, 274Shindig, 287Shire, David, 281Shirelles, 148, 151–153, 154, 
155, 220, 221
Shirley and Lee, 88, 89Shocklee, Hank, 341
Shook, Jack, 67Shore, Dinah, 64, 127Shrieve, Michael, 179Shuman, Mort, 138Shyne, 393Sia, 447Siano, Nicky, 275Sigel, Beanie, 398Sigma Sound Studios, 213, 245Silk, 390Silkk the Shocker, 394Sill, Lester, 153Silver, Al, 105Silver Beetles, 166Silver Bullet Band, 249Silver Echoes, 101Simmons, Gene, 242Simmons, Joseph, 336Simmons, Russell, 11, 398, 439Simon, Carly, 219, 220, 224Simon, Paul, 170–171, 222, 223, 
266, 314–316, 384, 430
Simon and Garfunkel, 170, 185, 
429
Simone, Nina, 172, 191
Simonon, Paul, 259Simple Minds, 310Simpson, Jessica, 365Simpson, Valerie, 157Sims Twins, 103Sinatra, Frank, 4, 13, 59, 64, 
118, 133, 137, 140–141, 199, 242
Sinatra, Nancy, 192Sinclair, John, 252Singing cowboys, 55–56The Singing Idol, 137Singing Nun, 12
Singles (film), 376Siouxsie and the Banshees, 261, 
267, 378
Siouxsie Sioux, 261, 264
Sir Douglas Quintet, 178Sire Records, 257Sir Mix-A-Lot, 396Sissle, Noble, 30Sister Souljah, 342, 355, 396Skaggs, Ricky, 381Skatemaster Tate, 346Skiffle music, 166, 168
Skillet Lickers, 50–51
Skrillex, 450, 451Skylight Singers, 101Slavery, 16, 18–19Slayer, 327, 330Sleater-Kinney, 438Sledge, Percy, 172, 212Sleepy Brown, 401Slick, Grace, 13, 184, 192, 194Slits, 267Sloan, P . F ., 440Sly and the Family Stone, 183, 
191, 194, 334
Sly Stone, 272, 378
Small, Christopher, 7Small, Millie, 266Smalls, Biggie, 357Smalls, Tommy, 79Smith, Bessie, 26, 44, 45, 46, 47, 
54, 57, 126
Smith, Chris, 27Smith, Clara, 44Smith, Erin, 408Smith, Fay “Smitty,” 65Smith, Huey “Piano,” 48, 88, 89Smith, Jeff, 303Smith, Joe, 26, 200, 203Smith, Mamie, 9, 44, 45Smith, Patti, 252, 253, 254, 256, 
257, 263, 264
Smith, Trixie, 44, 82Smith, Warren, 120Smith, Will, 345, 431Smith, Willie-the-Lion, 48Smoky Mountain Boys, 52Smucker, Tom, 271SNCC. See Student Non-Violent 
Coordinating Committee 
(SNCC)
Snider, Dee, 349Snoop Doggy Dogg, 355, 362, 
394, 397, 401, 447
Snow, Hank, 61Socialist Workers Party, 265Social media, 450–451. See also 
Internet; Online music
Facebook, 451, 455, 463, 464Google, 455MySpace, 451, 455Twitter, 451, 455, 464524  ROCKIN ’ OUTYouTube, 454–456, 463, 464
S.O.D., 327
Soft Cell, 289Soft Machine, 211Soft rock, 218–224
Sohl, Richard, 254So It Goes, 259Sojourner Truth, 344Solano, Rafael, 385Solé, 402Son By Four, 365Song plugging, 139Songwriters of America, 140
Songwriters Protective Associa-
tion, 141
Sonics, 373
Sonic Youth, 372, 377, 379Sonny and Cher, 170, 365Sonny Bono Copyright Term 
Extension Act (1998), 420
Sonny Boy Williamson, 95Sonny Terry, 162Sons of the Pioneers, 55Sony, 304, 361Sony Betamax case, 424Sony-BMG merger, 418
Sony Walkman, 419Sopwith Camel, 183So So Def, 396, 402Soul Assassins, 346Soul Asylum, 379Soul City Orchestra, 275Souljah, Sister, 342, 355Soulja Slim, 401Soul music, 10, 171–175, 
211–218
Soulsonic Force, 334, 346Soul Stirrers, 101, 103Soul Survivors, 213Soul Train, 213Sound films, 287Soundgarden, 370, 373, 376, 
377, 378, 379
Sounds (British music weekly), 
319
Sound Strike, 441Sousa, John Philip, 24, 29Souter, David, 427Southern, Eileen, 48Southern boogie, 228–234, 232, 
234
Southern Christian Leadership 
Conference (SCLC), 162
Southern Music Publishing 
Company, 61
Southern soul music, 171–175, 
212, 215, 217
Soviet Foundation for Survival 
and Development of Hu-
manity, 313
Space Jam, 392Spandau Ballet, 289Spaniels, 99, 106Sparks, Jordin, 454
Spearhead, 437Spears, Britney, 364–368, 365–
367, 368, 415, 442
Special Extermination Night, 
263
Specialty, 70, 89, 101
Spector, Phil, 5, 110, 146, 151–
155, 226, 368
Spector, Ronnie, 153Speir, Henry C., 40Spice Girls, 365, 408Spiders, 89
Spin Doctors, 379
Spin magazine, 403Spinners, 212, 213, 215Spirituals, 41Spivey, Victoria, 44Spotify, 463Springsteen, Bruce, 57, 223–
224, 248, 297–300, 305, 308, 311, 312, 371, 373, 430, 438, 440–441
Squire, Chris, 208SST label, 269, 270, 372Stafford, Jo, 63, 126
Stampers, 22Standells, 253Stanley, Paul, 242Staple Singers, 99, 162Starr, Edwin, 196Star Search, 364Stax, 198, 212, 217–218Stax-Volt label, 172–173Steele, Michael, 226Steely Dan, 248Stefani, Gwen, 408Stein, Chris, 257Stein, Seymour, 257Stephney, Bill, 341Steppenwolf, 234, 235Sterling label, 68Sterne, Jonathan, 418Stetsasonic, 313, 344Stevens, Connie, 132, 133, 137Stevens, Ray, 434Stevens, Steve, 293Stevie Wonder, 156, 157, 198, 
212, 216, 224, 248, 272, 292, 304, 305, 308, 430, 431
Stewart, Bill, 86
Stewart, Jim, 172, 173, 218Stewart, Rod, 211, 248, 281Stiff Records, 261, 267Stigwood, Robert, 279–280, 296Stiles, Danny “Cat Man,” 78Stilettos, 257Still, William Grant, 55Stills, Stephen, 189, 195Stills, Steven, 166, 189, 194, 195Sting, 268, 311, 313, 395, 430St. Louis Blues, 46, 54Stoller, Mike, 94, 112, 151–152, 
153
Stoloff, Morris, 86
Stompboxes, 318Stone, Sly, 296, 331
Stone Poneys, 222Stonewall Inn, 275Stonewall rebellion, 275Stooges, 245, 252, 253Stop the Violence movement, 
314
Storer, George, 86Storer Broadcasting, 86
Storm, Gale, 128
Storz, Todd, 86Stoute, Steven, 393Straight Arrow, 202Straight Arrow, 202Straight Outta Brooklyn, 345Strait, George, 350, 382Strand, 251Stranglers, 259, 262Strauss, Neil, 364Stravinsky, 281Straw, Will, 309Stray Cats, 295
StreamCast Networks, 427Street, John, 313The Streets of Paris, 37Streisand, Barbra, 247, 277Strong, Barrett, 148, 155Strummer, Joe, 259Studdard, Ruben, 454Student Non-Violent Coordinat-
ing Committee (SNCC), 150
Student revolts in Paris, 251Students for a Democratic Soci-
ety (SDS), 160
Stylistics, 213, 214Styrene, Poly, 267Styx, 249, 381Sub Pop label, 373Suga Mama, 410Sugar Hill Gang, 335Suicidal Tendencies, 327Sullivan, Ed, 190, 292Sullivan, James, 409Sullivan, Jim, 378Sultans of Swing, 79Summer, Donna, 273, 275, 
276–277, 278, 279, 290, 
294, 295
Summers, Andy, 268Sun, 70, 113-123Sun City project, 310, 315Sunday Ramparts, 202Sunny Side Up, 36Sun Ra, 191Sun Records, 95, 115Sunshine, 46Superfly (film), 212Superstars 83, 295Supertramp, 249
Supremes, 151, 156–157, 158, 
165, 215, 236, 292
Surfaris, 143Surf music, 142–148
Sutcliffe, Stuart, 166Swallow, 373Swallows, 104Swan label, 133Swan Silvertones, 99Swastikas, 263–264Sweet Honey in the Rock,  
224
Swift, Taylor, 360, 412, 415Swinging Blue Jeans, 165S
x
 10, 387
Syncopated Society Orchestra, 
30
System of a Down, 437
Tainter, Charles Sumner, 21
Talib Kweli, 438–439Talking Heads, 252, 253, 257–
258, 267, 271, 274, 313, 314, 336
Tallent, Garry, 298
Tamla label, 155Tamla Motown, 211Tampa Red, 42Tango, 29Tankian, Serj, 440Tanner, Gid, 50Tarpley, Brenda Mae, 123, 228Tarriers, 132Taste of Honey, 12Tatum, Art, 101Tavares, 279Taylor, James, 199, 218, 219, 
220, 221, 223, 224, 381, 412
Taylor, Johnny, 103Taylor, Sam, 83Tchaikovsky, 3Tear the Roof off the Sucker 
(Give Up the Funk)”, 274–275
Tebbitt, Norman, 309Technology. See also Internet; 
Online music
amplitude modulation (AM), 
development of, 76
electrical recording, 57
electric guitar, 5, 13, 54, 72, 
99, 143, 183
electronic dance music, 386, 
403, 442–444
FM rock radio, 201–202heavy metal and, 317–318high fidelity, 75–76live music and, 457–458MP3, 418–429peer-topeer (P2P), 419,  SUBJECT  I NDE x  525424–428
phonographs, 21–23
and popular taste, 75–77portable cassettes, 287rap music and, 318
rock ‘n’ roll, 4–6sound reinforcement, 201transistors, 75youth culture and, 317
Techno music, 443Teddy Bears, 110Teenage Lust, 243Teenagers, 128
Teen pop, 364–369
sales, 364–365
Teen Queens, 128
Tee Tot, 68Telecommunications Act of 
1996, 432
Telegraphy, 32Television, 287Television (band), 252, 253–254, 
257
Temptations, 156, 157, 191, 215, 
216, 292
Tenenbaum, Joel, 427
Terence Trent D’Arby, 372The Terror Squad, 401Terry Gilkyson and the Easy 
Riders, 132
Testament, 327Texas Playboys, 54Thank God It’s Friday (film), 277Tharpe, Sister Rosetta, 82Thatcher, Margaret, 259, 267, 
313
That Night in Rio, 37Theater Owners Booking Asso-
ciation (TOBA), 44
Théberge, Paul, 444Thee Midnighters, 175Theft. See Piracy and theft
Them, 165Thiele, Bob, 121Thin Lizzy, 331Third Base, 345Thirteenth Floor Elevators, 253Thomas, Rob, 383, 384Thomas, Rufus, 115Thomas Dolby, 289Thomas-Rasset, Jammie, 426
Thompkins, Russell, Jr., 214Thompson, Sue, 135Thompson, Tony, 301Thornton, Willie Mae “Big 
Mama,” 94, 183
Three Cheers, 36Three Degrees, 213369th Infantry Regiment Hell 
Fighters Band, 30
Three Suns, 109Thunders, Johnny, 262Tibbett, Lawrence, 37Ticketmaster, 457, 458
Tico Records, 112Tiesto, 450, 451Tijuana Brass, 175Til, Sonny, 85, 128
Tillotson, Johnny, 135Timbaland, 396, 398, 403Timberlake, Justin, 364, 366, 
367, 405, 439
Tim Dogg, 335Time, 224, 402, 405Time Inc., 361Time Warner, 361
Tin Pan Alley, 139, 140, 171, 
303
blues and, 6, 26, 27–28
dance crazes, 29–30film industry and, 35–36Hollywood films and, 303jazz, 6, 28–29Jewish Americans and,  
24–25
Latin American themes, 
36–38, 111
musical theater, 31opposition to rock ‘n’ roll, 
140–142
popular culture, 3, 16
ragtime, 6, 25–27, 29recording industry and, 
23–24
transition to rock ‘n’ roll, 2, 6
Tippin, Aaron, 433Titanic, 409TK Records, 276TLC, 390–391TOBA. See Theater Owners 
Booking Association (TOBA)
Toll, Robert, 20Tom and Jerry, 170Tom Club, 336Tommy Dorsey Orchestra, 111Tonight Show, 137Tony Torrez and the Latin 
 
Rascals, 337
Toop, David, 334, 356Too Short, 335, 396Top Forty Radio, 153, 154, 157, 
158, 159, 160, 163, 166, 175, 400
Top Hat, 36
Top of the Pops, 289Torin, “Symphony Sid,” 78Tornadoes, 143Torrence, Dean, 147Torrez, Tony, 337Tosches, Nick, 11, 42, 81Tosh, Peter, 266Toto, 293Touré, 356Touzet, Rene, 112Tower of Power, 272Townshend, Pete, 183, 189, 205, 
206, 308, 322, 431
Trackmasters, 398
Traffic, 183Transistors, 75
Trashmen, 143Travis, Merle, 228Travis, Randy, 350Travolta, John, 280, 281, 282, 
303
Treacherous Three, 334Treadwell, George, 106T. Rex, 243. See also Tyranno-
saurus Rex
A Tribe Called Quest, 335, 342, 
343
Tribute, 431Tri-Phi label, 215Tritt, Travis, 382Triumph, 324Triumphs, 215Troggs, 189, 253Troubleman, 212TRU (The Real Untouchables), 
394
Trucks, Butch, 232
Trudeau, Margaret, 281Tubb, Ernest, 52, 61, 65, 68Tucker, Maureen, 252Tucker, Sophie, 31, 44, 55Tull, Jethro, 331, 438Turbans, 112Ture, Kwame. See Carmichael, 
Stokely
Turk, 396Turner, Big Joe, 50, 72, 79, 83, 
88, 127
Turner, Brian, 341Turner, Ike, 212Turner, Tina, 212, 304, 308Turtles, 170Twain, Shania, 359, 382, 408, 
409–410, 412
20/20, 351Twentieth Century Fox, 35, 
36, 37
Twins, Thompson, 290Twin Towers. See World Trade 
Center
Twista, 401, 405Twisted Sister, 324, 349
Twitter, 451, 455Twitty, Conway, 120, 122, 1272 Live Crew, 342, 344, 354, 3962-Tone, 2662001: A Space Odyssey (film),  
237
Tyers, Will, 31Tyga, 407Tygers of Pan Tang, 319Tyler, Red, 88Tyler, Steven, 240, 337Tympani Five, 68, 115Tyrannosaurus Rex, 243. See 
also T. Re x
U2, 310, 311, 313, 381, 430, 
431, 458Uggams, Leslie, 121U- God, 397Ukulele, 52Ulrich, Lars, 328Ultramagnetic, 342Uncle Jam, 336Underwood, Carrie, 453–454
Underworld, 443
United Artists, 35, 216, 262United Way’s September 11 
Fund, 429
Universal, 35Universal Music Group, 360, 
361, 418, 452
University of North Carolina, 
424
Univision, 389Up in Smoke tour, 397Urban blues, 43, 44Urban Contemporary, 283Urban Cowboy (film), 381
Urban magazine, 387Ure, Midge, 307Uriah Heep, 237USA Cable Network, 288U.S.A. for Africa, 307, 308,  
309
U.S. Census Bureau, 383U.S. Constitution, 420U.S. Department of Justice, 423Usher, 390, 392, 401, 447, 455U.S. Marine Band, 22U.S. Supreme Court, 427UTFO, 340, 342
Vai, Steve, 321
Vail, Tobi, 408Valens, Ritchie, 12, 95, 111,  
113, 142, 162, 169, 175, 232
Valentinos, 103Valenzuela, Richard. See Valens, 
Ritchie
Vallee, Rudy, 109
Valli, Frankie, 110Valli, June, 128Van Alstyne, Egbert, 24Vance, Jay, 352Vandross, Luther, 304, 390Vanguard label, 188Van Halen, 240, 320–321, 322–
323, 324, 325, 326
Van Halen, Alex, 240Van Halen, Eddie, 240, 292, 293, 
310, 318, 320, 321, 322, 323, 326526  ROCKIN ’ OUTVanilla Fudge, 236
Vanilla Ice, 345Vanity, 296Van Zandt, Steven, 298. See also 
Little Steven 
Van Zant, Ronnie, 233
Varèse, Edgar, 55V ariety, 56, 139Vaudeville, 20–21, 24, 43VCR. See Video cassette re-
corder (VCR)
Vedder, Eddie, 376, 430Vee, Bobby, 135
Vee Jay label, 70, 99–100, 106, 
162, 164
Veejays (video jockeys), 288
Vega, Suzanne, 313, 408, 409Velez, Lupe, 37Velvet Underground, 206, 252, 
253, 258
Venom, 319Ventures, 144, 373Verizon, 425–426Verlaine, Tom, 252, 253, 254Vertigo, 413Verve records, 137
VH-1, 288, 313Via Afrika, 310Vibe, 392Vibranaires, 104Vibrators, 261Vicious, Sid, 261, 264Vico C, 387Victor label, 22–23Victor Talking Machine Com-
pany, 22
Video Beat, 288Video cassette recorder (VCR), 
286
Video Rentals chart, 286Video Sales chart, 286Video Soul, 288Vietnam War, 124, 171, 181, 
192, 194, 196, 231, 300, 431, 437
Vig, Butch, 376Village People, 277Village Voice, 275Vincent, Gene, 121, 127Vincent, Johnny, 89Vincent, Rickey, 274
Vinson, Eddie “Cleanhead,” 69Vinton, Bobby, 135Violence
in punk music, 261–263in rap music, 318, 325, 327, 
342, 343, 344, 346, 348, 349, 350, 352, 354, 355, 394, 398, 403
VIPs, 178Virgin, 262, 363Virginia Minstrels, 18, 19Virgin Records, 363, 443Viscounts, 144
Vita, 399Vitaphone process, 35Vivendi, 361Vixen, 324, 332, 333
Vocalion, 46Voidoids, 257Von Tilzer, Harry, 24Vote for Change, 442Voting Rights Act, 171
WABC radio, 141, 201
Waikiki Wedding, 36Wailers, 266, 373Wainwright, Loudon, III, 223Waiting to Exhale, 408Waits, Tom, 223Wakeman, Rick, 208, 210, 244WAKR radio station, 79Wald, Elijah, 39, 41, 43Walden, Narada Michael, 305Walden, Phil, 233Walker, Aaron “T-Bone,” 47Walker, Jack, 78Walker, Mel, 94Walker, Scott, 441
Walker, T-Bone, 83, 93, 94Wallace, Michelle, 391Wallace, Sippie, 44Waller, Fats, 48, 54Wallerstein, Ted, 57, 76Wallichs, Glenn, 62Wal-Mart, 350Walser, Robert, 206–207, 234, 
235, 320, 326, 347
Walsh, Joe, 231Wand, Hart, 27War, 216, 217. See also specific 
entries
Ward, Billy, 101Ward, Brian, 102Ward, Ed, 133, 202Warhol, Andy, 206, 243, 252Warlocks, 184Warner, 242Warner Brothers, 35, 36, 56, 
198, 199
Warner Communications, 199, 
288, 361
Warner Music, 361, 417, 418Warner Records
early seventies, 198–199
globalization, 296Grateful Dead, 188James Taylor and, 219Prince and, 296progressive rock, 203, 204rap music, 355R.E.M. and, 363schlock rock, 132
Warner-Seven Arts labels, 199Warren, Diane, 390Warren, Harry, 36, 37Warwick, Dionne, 154,  
300, 306
W .A.S.P ., 321, 324, 359
Watch Your Step, 31Waters, Ethel, 44, 48
Waters, Roger, 210Watson, Doc, 228Watts, Charlie, 167, 168Watts, Howard, 67Watts Prophets, 335Wattstax (concert), 217Wavy Gravy and the Hog Farm 
Commune, 193
Wayne, Lil, 447Wayne County, 243Wayne Fontana and the Mind-
benders, 166
WBBM radio, 201WBCN radio, 201WBLS radio, 275, 356WBN
x
 radio station, 79
WCBS radio, 55WDIA radio, 78, 139WEA record company, 360Weavers, 66, 159Webb, Chick, 54, 63
Weekend in Havana, 37Weil, Cynthia, 138, 153–154Weill, Kurt, 160Weinberg, Max, 298Weinstein, Deena, 234, 320,  
327
Weir, Bob, 184Weirdos, 258Wells, Junior, 72Wenner, Jann, 202, 203WERD radio station, 78Wesley, Fred, 274West, Kanye, 401, 405–406, 
407, 451
West, Sandy, 226Western Electric, 35Western swing, 54Westinghouse, 32Westwood, Vivienne, 251, 263, 
264
Wexler, Jerry, 10, 72, 173, 211, 
216
Weymouth, Tina, 257, 336Whannel, Paddy, 3Where the Action Is (TV show), 
181
Whipper Whip, 335
Whitcomb, Ian, 23, 25, 65White, Barry, 217, 390White, Josh, 162White, Le Roy “Lasses,” 27White, Maurice, 273White Aryan Resistance (WAR), 
353
White guys with guitars 
(WGWG), 454
White Lion, 324Whiteman, Paul, 28, 29, 31, 35, 
43, 55, 62
Whitesnake, 330
Whitfield, Norman, 157The Who, 183, 185, 189, 193, 
206, 210, 235, 374, 431
Whodini, 336, 340
WHOM radio station, 78Who Put the Bomp (rock fanzine), 
202
Wicke, Peter, 5, 7, 200Wide Woman/Urana label, 227Widgery, David, 265
Wilcox, Kathi, 408
WILD. See Women’s Indepen-
dent Labels Distributors (WILD)
Wilde, Oscar, 243Wildmon, Donald, 352Wild Style, 335Will, George, 298will.i.am, 390Williams, Bert, 23Williams, Charles, 88Williams, Dennis, 410Williams, Hank, 61, 65, 66–68, 
134, 381
Williams, Hank, Jr., 433
Williams, Mayo “Ink,” 46Williams, Peter, 199Williams, Tex, 66Williams, Tony, 109Williamson, Cris, 227Williamson, Sonny Boy, 54Willis, Ellen, 183, 202, 225, 
227, 243
Wills, Bob, 36, 52, 55, 68, 114Wilson, Brian, 5, 144, 145, 146, 
147
Wilson, Carl, 144Wilson, Dennis, 144Wilson, Jackie, 88, 94, 102, 155Wilson, Jan, 147Wilson, Mary, 156–157, 158Wilson, Stephen, 424Wilson, Teddy, 49, 57Wilson, Tom, 170Wilson, Woodrow, 32Winehouse, Amy, 412Wings, 247Winner, Langdon, 87, 89, 202
WINS radio, 63, 79, 141Winterhalter, Hugo, 127Winter Olympics, 392Win Without War, 439Winwood, Steve, 183, 305Wired, 444Wireless communication, 31–32Wireless Telegraph and Signal 
Company, 31
Wisconsin Chair Company, 46Wisin & Yandel, 389, 390WJW radio, 79 SUBJECT  I NDE x  527WKBW radio, 86
WKNR radio, 201WKTU radio, 281, 283WLIB radio, 79WLS radio, 55
WLUP , 282WLW radio, 55WMCA radio, 78WNBC radio, 55WNEW radio, 62, 201WNEW-TV , 141WNO
x
, 55
Wolf, Howlin’, 5
Wolfe, Alison, 408
Wolfe, Tom, 152–153, 184Wolfer, Bill, 293Womack, Bobby, 103WOMAD (World of Music, 
Arts, and Dance Festival), 311
Women. See also Feminism; 
Gender discrimination; Sexism
classic blues and, 44–46deejaying, 62diversity of, 415
feminism and, 192, 193, 222, 
342
gender discrimination, 
13–14, 110, 294
girl groups, 151–155in heavy metal, 236, 240, 
242, 324
in hip hop, 356honors for, 412misogyny, 13music charts and, 411–412
music of the 90s, 359–360objectification in music vid-
eos, 294
in popular music, 13, 226, 
408
popular music and, 408–416
in punk, 266, 268in rap music, 403r&b music and, 410rock music and, 408sexism and, 353in soft rock, 218
at Woodstock, 194
Women’s Independent Labels 
Distributors (WILD), 
227
Women’s music, 225–228Wonder, Stevie, 306Wood, Andrew, 376Wood, Randy, 128Wood, Ron, 205, 308Woodmansey, Mick, 244Woodstock Music and Art Fair, 
193–196
WOPA radio station, 78
Work, John W ., 42, 71World Class Wrecking Cru, 336World Trade Center, 417World Trade Organization 
(WTO), 440
World War I, 22, 23, 24, 30–31, 
32, 48, 139
World War II, 9, 16, 33, 35, 
36–37, 59, 64–65, 75, 77, 85, 383, 387Worley, Darryl, 434
WOR radio, 55Worrell, Bernard, 271, 274Worth, Bobby, 3WOV radio station, 79
Wozniak, Steve, 309, 324Wright, Herbert, 30Wright, Johnny, 364Wright Stuff management com-
pany, 364
WRKS radio, 341WSBC radio, 62WSM radio, 55
WSOK radio station, 78
WTBS, 288WTI
x
 radio, 86
Wurlitzer, 56Wu-Tang Clan, 397–398, 400, 
402, 439
Wu-Tang: Shaolin Style (game), 
397
WWRL radio station, 79Wyman, Bill, 168
x
 (band), 258, 310, 318, 341
x
ER radio, 62
X Factor, 454
x
-Ray Spex, 267
Yanovsky, Zal, 171
Yardbirds, 182, 183, 235Yasgur, Max, 193, 195Yearwood, Trisha, 382Yella, 336, 340Yes, 206, 208, 210, 211Yoakam, Dwight, 382
Yodeling, 42Yohannon, Tim, 380Yoko Ono, 192Youman, Vincent, 37
Young, Angus, 319Young, Charles M., 249, 251, 
351
Young, La Monte, 252Young, Malcolm, 319, 341Young, Neil, 195, 199, 230, 233, 
310, 312, 378, 430, 431, 434, 440, 441
Young Black Teenagers, 345Young Money label, 406, 407Young Rascals, 153. See also 
Rascals
Your Hit Parade, 9, 34, 35, 38, 
56, 64, 86
Youth culture, 4–5YouTube, 454–456Yo Yo, 342
Zappa, Frank, 198, 206, 242, 
348, 349, 350
Ziegfeld, Flo, 20Zimmerman, Robert. See Dead-
mau5; Dylan, Bob
Zombie, Rob, 397Zombies, 165Zook, Kristal Brent, 345Zune, 428ZZ Top, 232, 233, 294, 363528Music Index
ABC, 216
Abraham, Martin, and John, 191Abraxas, 181Ace of Spades, 319Across the Great Divide, 229
Across the Valley from the 
Alamo, 64
Addicted to Love, 294After the Ball, 21Against All Odds (Take a Look 
at Me Now), 304
Age Ain’t Nothing but a Number, 
392
Ain’t 2 Proud 2 Beg, 390Ain’t Got No Home, 89Ain’t It Funny, 399Ain’t Nobody Here but Us  
 
Chickens, 68
Ain’t No Mountain High  
Enough, 157
Ain’t That a Shame, 83, 88, 89, 
128
The Air I Breathe, 213Aja, 248Aladdin Sane, 245Alexander’s Ragtime Band, 
26, 27
Alive, 429
Alla en El Rancho Grande, 112All Day and All of the Night, 
167
Allegheny Moon, 86All Eyez on Me, 357All Hail the Queen, 343, 344All I Have to Do Is Dream, 122All I Really Want to Do, 170All I Want for Christmas Is 
You, 362
All Night Long (All Night), 300All of You, 12, 305All Shook Up, 118Almost Blue, 267Alone at Last, 102Along Came Jones, 106Along Comes Mary, 181Always on Time, 399Amazing Grace, 162Amen, 162America: A Tribute to 
 
Heroes, 410
American Idiot, 438American Life, 437–438
American Skin (41 Shots), 371, 
438
American Woman, 234America the Beautiful, 431Amerikkka’s Most Wanted, 344
Anarchy in the U.K., 259, 260, 
 262, 264
Andalucia, 37. . . And Justice for All, 328–329
. . . And Justice for All, 330And Then There Was X, 399Animal (F**k like a Beast), 324Annie Had a Baby, 103Anniversary Song, 64Another Brick in the Wall, 210Another Saturday Night, 103Another Side of Bob Dylan, 160
Anthem of the Sun, 184
Apache, 334A Pocket Full of Kryptonite, 379Appetite for Destruction, 331April in Portugal, 125April Love, 130The Archies, 287Area Codes, 404Are We Not Men? We Are Devo!, 
259
Are You Experienced, 189Are You Lonesome Tonight, 118Armed Forces, 268
Arnold Layne, 210As I Am, 411Asia Minor, 144As Long As You Love Me, 365As Nasty as They Wanna Be, 344, 
354
A-Tisket, A-Tasket, 63Atlantic City, 297At My Front Door, 130At the Hop, 213Axis: Bold as Love, 189
Baby, (Ashanti), 399
Baby, (Justin Bieber), 455–456Baby, Baby, Baby, 390Baby, I Love You, 173Baby, I Love Your Way, 247–248Baby, Let Me Take You Home, 
169
Baby, Let’s Play House, 84Baby Boy, 400, 410Baby I Love You, 153Baby I’m Burnin’, 281Baby It’s You, 106, 152Baby Let Me Follow You Down, 
169
Baby Love, 157, 158
Baby One More Time, 365, 366, 
368Baby Please Don’t Go, 104–105
Baby Seals’ Blues, 27Baby Talk, 147Baby What You Want Me to 
Do, 99
Back Down, 400
Back for the Attack, 324Back in Black, 319Back in the High Life, 303Back in My Arms Again, 157Backlash Blues, 172Back on the Chain Gang, 268Back Stabbers, 213
Backstreet Boys, 365
Back to Black, 412Bad, 311Bad, 370Bad, Bad Whiskey, 69Bad Boy for Life, 393Badlands, 224Bad Luck, 213Badmotorfinger, 379Bad Romance, 412, 413–414Bailamos, 383Ballad of the Green 
 
Berets, 
171, 434
Ball and Chain, 183
Ball of Confusion (That’s What 
the World Is Today), 191
Ballroom Blitz, 243Banana Boat (Day-O), 131–132The Band, 229Bang, Bang, 178Bangarang, 450Bang Your Head (Metal Health), 
321
Barracuda, 240Barrio Fino, 388Barrio Fino: En Directo, 389The Basement Tapes, 229B’day, 410Beale Street Blues, 28Beat It, 292, 293Beatnik Fly, 144Beautiful, 367Be-Bop-A-Lula, 121Be-Bop Baby, 137Because of You, 64Because They’re Young, 136Before the Flood, 229Begin the Beguine, 37
Belsen Was a Gas, 264Be My Baby, 151, 153Bennie and the Jets, 248The Best Damn Thing, 411The Best of Both Worlds, 392
Betcha by Golly, Wow, 213Be True to Your School, 146Beyond the Season, 381Big Blue Ball of War, 437, 440
Big Cheese, 376Bigger and Deffer, 340Big Yellow Taxi, 219Billie Jean, 292Billion Dollar Babies, 242Bird Dog, 122Bird in a Gilded Cage, 24The Birds Do It, The Bees Do 
It, 349
Birds of Fire, 211Birthday, 328Bitches Brew, 210, 211A Bit of Liverpool, 164The Black Album, 399, 445Black and Tan Fantasy, 48, 49Black and White, 292, 293Black Angel’s Death Song, 252Black Magic Woman, 181Black Pearl, 152Black Sunday, 346Blame It on the Bossa Nova, 138
Blank Generation, 253, 254Bleach, 376Blitzkrieg Bop, 263Blizzard of Ozz, 321Blonde and Blonde, 185Blonde on Blonde, 170, 228Blood on the Tracks, 229Bloodshot Eyes, 71Blood Sugar Sex Magik, 379Blowin’ in the Wind, 157, 159, 
163, 308
Blown Away, 454Blue (Joni Mitchell), 219, 402Blue (Lee Ann Rimes), 382, 408
Blue Angel, 122Blueberry Hill, 83, 88Blue Monday, 88Blue Moon, 105Blue Moon of Kentucky, 65, 116Blue Moves, 248Blue on Blue, 135The Blueprint, 399Blues Breakers, 183Blues for Moon Dog, 79Blues Stay Away from Me, 100
Blue Suede Shoes, 86, 120Blue Tail Fly, 144Blue Velvet, 106, 135Blue Yodel No. 9, 52 M USIC  I NDE x  529Bobby Sox to Stockings, 134
Bo Diddley, 83, 94, 95Body Count, 355Bohemian Rhapsody, 287Bomb the World, 437
Bomber, 319Bomber, 319Boogaloo Blues, 178Boogie Chillen, 69, 99Boogie Fever, 279Boogie Woogie, 50The Book of Taliesyn, 237Boom!, 437
Bootylicious, 391
Borderline, 302Born a Woman, 192Born in the U.S.A., 298–299,  
300
Born in the U.S.A., 297–300, 303Born into the 90s, 392Born This Way, 415Born to Be Wild, 234Born to Run, 223, 300Boston, 248Both Sides Now, 219Bouncin’ Back (Bumpin’ Me 
Against the Wall), 396
Bo Weevil, 128
The Boy Is Mine, 410Boyz II Men II, 391Boyz N the Hood, 340, 345Brain Salad Surgery, 207Brass in Pocket, 268Brave, 386Breaking Up Is Hard to  
Do, 134
Break on Through (To the 
Other Side), 190
Breakout, 303Breakthrough, 313Breathe, 383Breathless, 120The Breeze and I, 38Bridge over Troubled Water, 
171, 429
Bringing It All Back Home, 160Bring It Back, 406Bring the Noise, 318Bristol Stomp, 134Britney, 366Brothers and Sisters, 232
Brown-Eyed Handsome  
Man, 96
The Buena Vista Social Club, 384Built for Speed, 295Bumble Boogie, 144Bump N’ Grind, 392Burn, 392, 401Bush Killa, 439Bushleaguer, 438Business, 439Bus Stop, 166But I Do, 89Butterfly, 132
Buttons and Bows, 64By Any Means, 341Bye Bye Love, 122By the Time I Get to Phoenix, 
217
Calendar Girl, 134
California Dreamin’, 171California Girls, 146California Über Alles, 271Call It Stormy Monday, 83Canciones de Mi Padre, 12Can’t Buy Me Love, 166Can’t Get Enough, 240Can the Can, 226Can’t Slow Down, 300, 303Can’t Stand Losing You, 268Cara Mia, 135Career Opportunities, 261Carioca, 37Carnival Ride, 453Carole King: Writer, 220Carry Me Back to Old Virginny, 
20
Castles, 225Cathy’s Clown, 122
Cat Scratch Fever, 237Celebration, 273Celebrity, 365Centerfold, 294Chain Gang, 103, 162Chain of Fools, 173Chains of Love, 72, 79Chances Are, 127A Change Is Gonna Come, 163, 
171
The Changer and the Changed, 227Changes, 243, 244Chaos, 264Charity Ball, 225Charlie Brown, 106The Chase, 381Chattanooga Blues, 43Chattanooga Choo-Choo, 281Cheap Thrills, 183Cherokee Boogie, 100Cherry Bomb, 226Chica Chica Boom Chic, 37Children of the Grave, 236Chimes of Freedom, 171
Choice of Colors, 191Choo Choo Ch’Boogie, 69Christina Aguilera, 367The Chronic, 344, 396The Cisco Kid, 217Close My Eyes Forever, 332Closer to the Ground, 225C’mon, Let’s Go, 113Cold, Cold Heart, 68Cold Sweat, 174The College Dropout, 405, 406Combat Rock, 438Combat Rock, 262
Come a Little Bit Closer, 135Come and Get These Memories, 
151
Come Away with Me, 411
Come Back Baby, 102Come Back to Sorrento, 118Come Go with Me, 130Come into My House, 344Come on Over, 382Come See About Me, 157Come with Me, 393Como Ama una Mujer, 386
Concerto for Group and Orchestra, 
206, 237
Confessions, 392
Confessions Part II, 392, 401Control, 303
The Cookbook, 403Cooleyhighharmony, 391Copenhagen, 48Cop Killer, 355, 378Could It Be I’m Falling in Love, 
213
Country Road, 219Court and Spark, 219
Courtesy of the Red, White and 
Blue (The Angry Ameri-can), 433, 435, 436
Crackin’ Up, 95Crazy, 122, 231Crazy Blues, 9, 44, 45Crazy in Love, 410Crazy Man Crazy, 81CrazySexyCool, 391Creep, 391Criminal Minded, 340Crocodile Rock, 248Cross Country, 225Crossover, 272Crossroads, 47Crushin’, 340Cry, 127Crying, 122Crying in the Chapel, 84, 85, 
101, 105, 128
Cry of the Wild Goose, 66Cuban Love Song, 37Cult of Personality, 331Cum on Feel the Noize, 321Cup of Life, 384
Cuts Both Ways, 12
Daddy’s Little Girl, 342
Da Doo Ron Ron, 151Da Game Is to Be Sold, Not to Be 
Told, 394
Dale Don Dale, 389Dallas Blues, 27Damaged, 269Damned Damned Damned, 262Dance for Me, 342Dance to the Bop, 121Dance to the Music, 195
Dance with Me, 106, 112, 151Dance with Me Henry, 103, 128Dancing in the Street, 156, 157Danger Zone, 304
Dangerously in Love, 410Danny Boy, 122Da Real World, 403Darkness on the Edge of Town, 
224
Dark Side of the Moon, 210Dat Draggy Rag, 27Date Rape, 342
Daydream, 408
A Day in the Life, 185, 186Days of Future Past, 206Deacon’s Hop, 69The Deadly Nightshade, 225Dead Man’s Curve, 147Dear Diary, 411Dear Lady Twist, 135Dear Mr. President, 440Death Certificate, 344, 379Dede Dinah, 134Dedicated Follower of Fashion, 
167
Dedicated to the One I Love, 
103, 148, 152
Deep Purple in Rock, 235
Deep Six, 373Deguello, 233Déjà Vu, 195Dem Bow, 388Desire, 229Destiny Fulfilled, 410Deutschland Uber Alles, 264Devil Gate Drive, 226Devil or Angel, 106, 135Diamond Dogs, 245Diana, 112, 134, 137The Diary of Alicia Keys, 411Diary of a Madman, 321Didn’t We Almost Have It All, 
300
Different Drummer, 222Dim, Dim the Lights, 115Dirt, 376Dirty Diana, 293Dirty Mind, 296Disraeli Gears, 182Dixie Land, 18–19
The Dixieland Jass Band One- 
Step, 48
Doctor My Eyes, 224Document, 372Does Your Chewing Gum Lose 
Its Flavor (On the Bed-post Over Night), 166
Doggie in the Window,  
84, 125
DoggyStyle, 355Do It (‘Til You’re Satisfied), 275Dolphin, 79530  ROCKIN ’ OUTDónde Están Los Ladrones? 
(Where Are the Thieves?), 
386
Donna, 111, 113Don’t, 118
Don’t Be Angry, 128Don’t Be Cruel, 117, 118Don’t Call Me Nigger, Whitey, 
195, 378
(Don’t Fear) The Reaper, 241Don’t Give Us a Reason, 433Don’t Know Why, 411Don’t Let the Stars Get in Your 
Eyes, 125
Don’t Let the Sun Catch You 
Crying, 165
Don’t Think Twice, It’s Alright, 
160
Don’t Tread on Me, 429Don’t Wanna Lose You, 12Don’t Worry, 122Don’t Worry Baby, 146Don’t You Just Know It, 89Don’t You Know, 102Don’t You Know I Love You, 
106
Don’t You Want Me?, 289
Dookie, 379Doo Wah Diddy Diddy, 166Do Something for Me, 101Do That to Me One More Time, 
349
Do the Bird, 134Do the Twist with Ray Charles, 
135
Do They Know It’s Christmas., 
307
Double Crossing Blues, 106Double Nickels on the Dime, 270Down by the Riverside, 150Down for You, 399Downhearted Blues, 44Downtown, 167Down Went McGinty, 22Do Ya Think I’m Sexy?, 281Do You Believe in Magic, 170, 
171
Do You Feel Like We Do, 248Do You Really Want to Hurt 
Me, 289
Do You Wanna Dance, 112
Drag City, 147Dream Baby, 122Dreamboat Annie, 240Dream Lover, 112The Dream of the Blue Turtles, 
311
Dreams, 248Driftin’ Blues, 94Drinkin’ Wine Spo-dee-o-dee, 
72
Drop It Like It’s Hot, 401Duke of Earl, 99, 100, 148The Dynasty: Roc la Familia, 
 399
Earth Angel, 84, 105, 112, 128
Easier Said Than Done, 151
Easter, 254Easter Parade, 25East St. Louis Toodle-oo, 48E.A.T. (East African Tragedy), 
310
Eat a Peach, 232Ebony and Ivory, 305Efil4zaggin, 344, 370Eighteen, 24218 Wheeler, 411808s and Heartbreak, 406Eight Miles High, 181El Cartel: The Big Boss, 390Eleanor Rigby, 236Electric Ladyland, 189The Element of Freedom, 411El Loco, 233El Loco Cha Cha, 112El Manisero, 37El Paso, 122El Watusi, 178Emergency, 305
The Eminem Show, 439Empire State of Mind, 411Encore, 439The End, 190End of the Road, 391En Mi Imperio (In My Empire), 
389
Enter the Wu-Tang: 36, 397Ether, 398Eve of Destruction, 170, 171, 
434, 440
Everybody (Backstreet’s Back), 
365
Everybody’s Somebody’s Fool, 
134
Everybody’s Trying to Be My 
Baby, 120
Everybody Tango, 29Every Breath You Take, 268, 
393, 396
Everyday, 121Every Day I Write the Book, 
267
Everyday People, 191, 195
Every Little Thing She Does Is  
Magic, 268
Everything in Its Right Place, 
460–461
Evil Ways, 181Evolution, 391Exodus, 224An Eye for an Eye (Will Leave 
the Whole World Blind), 437
Expressway to Your Heart,  
213Facelift, 376
Fade to Black, 330, 351, 352Fallin’, 410Falling into You, 408False Media, 440
Fame, 246The Fame, 412The Fame Monster, 412, 413Family Affair, 195Family Portrait, 411Family Reunion, 213Fandango!, 233, 234Fan Mail, 391
Fanny Hill, 225
Fantasy, 393Farmer John, 175Fascination, 84The Fat Man, 79Fearless, 412Fear of a Black Planet, 341Fear of Music, 271Feel Like Makin’ Love, 217Feels Like Home, 411Ferry Cross the Mersey, 165Fever, 100Fifth Symphony, 281
52nd Street, 248Fight the Power, 314, 344, 345Fijación Oral, Vol. 1, 386, 388Final Solution, 258, 263The Final Straw, 437Fine Malt Lyrics, 346Fingertips-Part 2, 156Fire, 273Fire and Rain, 219Firebird Suite, 281The First Time Ever I Saw Your 
Face, 217
The Fish, 134Fish Cheer, 1945-10-15 Hours, 72Flashback, 389Flash Light, 275Flesh of My Flesh, 399The Flight of the Bumble Bee, 
144
Flirtin’ with Disaster, 234The Fly, 134Flying Home, 83Folsom Prison Blues, 121Fool, Fool, Fool, 106
Foolish, 399Footloose, 304For Blood and Empire, 440Forgive and Forget, 104Forgive Me, Girl, 213Forgiveness & Love, 437Formula, Vol. 1, 390Formula 50, 400For Sentimental Reasons, 64For the Roses, 219Forty Miles of Bad Road,  
136For What It’s Worth (Stop, Hey 
What’s That Sound), 189
For Your Love, 182
For Your Pleasure, 245For Your Precious Love, 99, 162
Fox on the Run, 243Fragile, 210Frampton, 247Frampton Comes Alive!, 247, 248Frankenchrist, 353, 354Frankie, 138Freak Out, 206Freebird, 233
Freedom (Paul McCartney), 431
Freedom (Richie Havens), 194Free South Africa, 312Freeway of Love, 217Fresh Cream, 182Fresh Fruit for Rotting Vegetables, 
271
From South Africa to South Caro-
lina, 224
Fuck with Us, 399Fulfillingness’ First Finale, 216Fumbling Towards Ecstasy, 409Fun, Fun, Fun, 146
Funhouse, 345Funky and Western, 225Funky Broadway, 173Funky Stuff, 273Funky Worm, 272, 273
Galveston, 231
Game Face, 394The Game of Love, 166Garth Brooks, 381Gasolina, 12, 388, 389Gaucho, 248Gee, 84, 105–106, 112Genie in a Bottle, 367, 383Genius of Love, 336George Jackson, 191Get Dancin’, 272Get Down Tonight, 276Get Happy!!, 267Get Off, 272Get on the Good Foot, 334Get Rich or Die Tryin, 400Get the Party Started, 411Get Up, 451Get Up, Stand Up, 224
Get Ur Freak On, 403Ghetto Child, 212The Ghetto Is Trying to Kill Me, 
394
Ghetto Postage, 394Ghosts in the Machine, 268G.I. Jive, 69The Gilded Palace of Sin, 229Ginger Bread, 134Girlfriend, 366, 411Girl from the North Country, 
228 M USIC  I NDE x  531The Girl Is Mine, 292, 305
Girls, Girls, Girls, 330Girls Just Wanna Have Fun, 294Girls on Film, 290, 294Give My Regards to Broadway, 
24
Give Peace a Chance, 192, 195
Glad All Over, 167Glad to Be Gay, 266The Globe Sessions, 410Glory Days, 300Glory of Love, 105Go, Jimmy, Go, 89
God Bless America, 25
God Bless the USA, 429, 433God Save the Queen, 263Go Girl Crazy!, 263Gone, 122Gone, Gone, Gone, 120Go Now!, 165Goodbye Cruel World, 132Goodbye Earl, 436Goodbye Yellow Brick Road, 
248
Good Golly, Miss Molly, 90Goodies, 401
Goodnight, It’s Time to Go, 106Good Rockin’ Tonight, 69, 82, 
83, 87
Good Times, 335Good Timin’, 130, 148Good Vibrations, 147Goody Goody, 106Goon Squad, 268Graceland, 314–316Graduation, 405The Grateful Dead, 184Grave Dancer’s Union, 379Grease, 280Great Balls of Fire, 84, 120The Great Depression, 399Greatest Hits (Francis), 133The Great Pretender, 109Great Speckled Bird, 55Green, 372Green, Green, 159Greenfields, 132Greetings From Asbury Park, N. 
J., 223
The Grey Album, 445–446Groove Me, 390
G.T.O., 144Guantanamera, 387Guess Who Shot Ya, 400Gum Drop, 109The Gypsy, 64Gypsy Woman, 162
Hail Mary, 400
Half as Much, 68Hallelujah, I Love Her So, 83, 
102
Handy Man, 130, 148, 219Happy Birthday Sweet Sixteen, 
134
Harbor Lights, 109
Hard Knock Life (Ghetto An-
them), 399
Harlem Nocturne, 94, 144
Hasten Down the Wind, 248Hate Me Now, 398Hats Off to Larry, 134Have Mercy Baby, 101Haven’t Got a Clue, 440Have You Forgotten, 434Head, 296
Headhunters, 211
Heartaches by the Number, 122Heartbreak Hotel, 117, 120Heartless, 406Heart Like a Wheel, 222Heart of Glass, 257, 271, 283Hearts of Stone, 100, 109Heat Wave, 151Heaven, I Need a Hug, 392Heaven Knows, 279Heaven Must Be Missing an 
Angel, 279
Hello, 300
Hello America, 319Hello Mary Lou, 134, 137Help Me, 219Henry’s Got Flat Feet (Can’t 
Dance No More), 103
Here Comes the Night, Gloria, 
165
Here in My Heart, 64Here It Goes Again, 455Here’s to the State of Missis-
sippi, 162
Here We Are, 12Here We Go, 365Hero, 431Heroin, 252Her Royal Majesty, 138He’s a Rebel, 134, 148, 151, 153He’s So Fine, 151He’s Sure the Boy I Love, 153He Was a Friend of Mine, 189Hey, Good Lookin’, 67Hey Joe, 189, 254Hey Jude, 192Hey Little Cobra, 144Hey Little Girl, 99
Hey Paula, 135Hey Senorita, 112Hey There, 84Hey Ya!, 401, 405High ‘n’ Dry, 319, 320High Noon, 66Highway 61 Revisited, 162Highway Star, 237Highway to Hell, 319Hippy Hippy Shake, 165Hips Don’t Lie, 386Hispanic Causing Panic, 346Hit ‘Em Up, 357
Hojita de Limón, 162Holiday, 302, 438Holiday in Cambodia, 271Holiday in the Sun, 264
Hollywood Swinging, 273Home, 436Home of the Brave, 439Honest I Do, 99Honey Chile, 68Honey Don’t, 120Honeydripper, 69Honey Hush, 72, 79
Honky Tonk, 100, 143
Honkytonk University, 436Honky-Tonk Women, 192Hoochie Coochie Man, 72Horses, 254A Horse with No Name, 223Hot, Cool and Vicious, 340, 342Hot Boyz, 403Hot Buttered Soul, 217Hotel California, 230, 231, 248Hot for Teacher, 294Hot Shot, 404Hot Stuff, 273
Hound Dog, 94, 117, 118, 119Hound Dog Man, 134House of the Rising Sun, 165, 
169
How Can a Poor Man Stand 
Such Times and Live?, 441
How Can You Mend a Broken 
Heart, 279
How Deep Is Your Love, 280How High the Moon, 84How I Could Just Kill a Man, 
346
Howlin’ Wind, 261How Sweet It Is (To Be Loved 
by You), 219
How We Gonna Make the Black 
Nation Rise, 335
How Will I Know, 300The Hucklebuck, 69, 134Hully Gully, 134Hungry Like the Wolf, 290Hunky Dory, 243Hurricane, 229Hush, 236
Hushabye, 105, 112Hustler’s Convention, 335Hysteria, 320
I Ain’t Marching Anymore, 162
I Almost Lost My Mind, 130I Am Not a Human Being, 406I Am Not at War with Anyone, 
437
I Am with You, 101I Am Woman, 192, 222I Believe (Frankie Laine), 125I Believe (Fantasia), 401
I Believe I Can Fly, 392I Can Never Go Home Any-
more, 155
I Can See Clearly Now, 266
I Can’t Be Satisfied, 72(I Can’t Get No) Satisfaction, 12, 
167, 259
I Can’t Help It, 68I Can’t Help It If I’m Still in 
Love with You, 67
I Can’t Help Myself, 156I Can’t Stop Loving You, 10
Iceberg, 340
I Didn’t Want to Do It, 89The Idiot Son of an Asshole, 438Idlewild South, 232I Don’t Care, 255I Don’t Have to Ride No More, 
104
I Don’t Wanna Be Learned, I 
Don’t Wanna Be Tamed, 255, 256
I Don’t Wanna Go Down to the 
Basement, 255
I Fall to Pieces, 122
I Feel For You, 336I Feel Free, 306I Feel Like Goin’ Home, 72I-Feel-Like-I’m-Fixin’-to-Die-
Rag, 194
I Feel Love, 277I Feel the Earth Move, 432If I Ain’t Got You, 411If I Can’t Have You, 280–281If I Didn’t Care, 104If I Had a Hammer, 159If I Ruled the World, 398If It Weren’t for the Music, 227If You Don’t Know Me by Now, 
213
If You Had My Love, 383, 384(If You Love Your Uncle Sam) 
Bring ‘Em Home, 441
I Get Around, 146I Got a Woman, 83, 102I Got Rhythm, 29I Gotta Feeling, 447I Got the Feelin’, 174(I Got the) Rockin’ Pneumonia 
and the Boogie-Woogie 
Flu, 89
I Got You, 174I Got You Babe, 170(I Got You) I Feel Good, 176I Hear You Knocking, 88, 89, 
128
I Just Want to Make Love to 
You, 72
I Know a Place, 167I Know You Know, 227I Like It Like That, 178I’ll Be Around, 213532  ROCKIN ’ OUTI’ll Be Home, 130
I’ll Be Missing You, 357, 393, 
396
I’ll Be There, 216, 362I’ll Make Love to You, 391
Illmatic, 398I’ll Never Find Another You,  
165
I’ll Tumble 4 Ya, 289I’ll Walk Alone, 64I Love How You Love Me, 110Imagine, 192, 429, 431Imagine My Surprise, 227
I’m a Man, 95
I’m a Slave 4 U, 366, 367I’m Beginning to See the Light, 
49
I Met Him on a Sunday, 152I’m Gone, 88I’m Gonna Be a Country Girl 
Again, 228
I’m Gonna Get Married, 89I’m Gonna Love You Just a 
Little More Baby, 217
I’m Henry VIII, I Am, 166I’m in Love Again, 88
I’m Ready, 71I’m Real, 386, 399I’m So Bored with the U.S.A., 
259
I’m So Glad, 182I’m So Lonesome I Could Cry, 
67
I’m Sorry, 123I’m Stickin’ with You, 122I’m Still in Love with You, 215I’m Walking, 137I’m Walking behind You, 125I’m Weak but I’m Willing, 69I’m with Stupid, 440I’m Your Angel, 392I’m Your Boogie Man, 276In-A-Gadda-Da-Vida, 237In a World Gone Mad, 437In Da Club, 400Independent Woman, 342I Need to Know, 383I Never Loved a Man (The Way 
I Love You), 173
In God We Trust, Inc., 271In My Life, Vol. 1, 399
In My Room, 146Inner City Blues, 191Inner Mounting Flame, 211Innervisions, 216In Pieces, 381In Rainbows, 459, 462Inside Your Heaven, 453In the Good Old Summer Time, 
24
In the Midnight Hour, 172, 173In the Name of Love, 290In the Navy, 277In the Shade of the Old Apple 
Tree, 24
In the Still of the Night, 37
Into the Fire, 438Introducing . . . The Beatles, 164
In Utero, 376–377I Only Have Eyes for You, 106, 
109
I Only Want to Be with You, 166I Put a Spell on You, 127I Quit My Pretty Mama, 100I Raq and Roll, 434Iron Flag, 398
Iron Man, 236, 406
I Say a Little Prayer, 154I Shall Be Released, 229The Israelites, 266Is You Is or Is You Ain’t My 
Baby?, 69
It Ain’t Me Babe, 170Italian Favorites (Francis), 133It Doesn’t Matter Anymore, 122It Hurts to Be in Love, 134It Keeps Right on A-Hurtin’, 
135
It Might as Well Rain until Sep-
tember, 220
It Only Takes a Minute, 275
It’s All About the Benjamins, 
393
It’s All Over Now, 167It’s All Right, 162It’s a Man’s Man’s Man’s World, 
174
It’s Dark and Hell Is Hot, 399It’s Just Begun, 334It’s Late, 137It’s My Party, 135It’s Not for Me to Say, 127It’s Now or Never, 118It’s Only Make Believe, 122, 127It’s So Easy, 121It’s Too Late, 222It’s Too Soon to Know, 104Itsy Bitsy Teenie Weenie Yellow 
Polkadot Bikini, 135
It Takes a Nation of Millions to 
Hold Us Back, 341
I’ve Been Loving You Too Long, 
172
I’ve Got Friends in Low Places, 
350
I’ve Got the Big River Blues, 100
I’ve Got You Under My Skin, 37Ivory Tower, 109, 128I Waited Too Long, 138I Walk the Line, 121I Wanna Dance with Somebody, 
300
(I Wanna) Testify, 274I Want a Bow-Legged Woman, 
69
I Want to Be Wanted, 123I Want to Hold Your Hand, 166
I Want You Back, 216, 365I Want You to Be My Girl, 106I Will Follow Him, 135I Will Survive, 275, 279
I Wonder Why, 109I Won’t Back Down, 431I Yi Yi Yi Yi, 37Izzo (H.O.V .A.), 399
Jagged Little Pill, 408
Jailhouse Rock, 118Jamaica Farewell, 131The Japanese Sandman, 31Jenny from the Block, 386Jeopardy, 295Jerusalem, 434Jim Dandy, 72, 84J.Lo, 384Jocko Homo, 259Joe Hill, 194Joe Turner Blues, 28Johannesburg, 224Johnny B. Goode, 96Johnny’s Theme, 137John Walker’s Blues, 434John Wesley Harding, 228
The Joshua Tree, 311Journey to the Center of the 
Mind, 181
Joy of Cooking, 225Judy’s Turn to Cry, 135Juke, 115Jump, 320, 322–323, 326Jump Around, 346Jumpin’ at the Woodside, 50Jungle Boogie, 273Jungleland, 223Just a Dream, 89Just Can’t Get Enough, 289Justify My Love, 353
Ka-Ding-Dong, 128
Kansas City, 148Karma Chameleon, 289Kashmir, 393Keep a Knockin’, 90Keep on Pushing, 162Keep Ya Head Up, 356Keep Your Eyes on the Prize, 
150
Kick out the Jams, 191
Kicks, 181Kid A, 458Kill ‘Em All, 330Killing Me Softly with His Song, 
217, 402
Kill the Poor, 271King Heroin, 182King of Kings, 389King of Rock, 337King of the Delta Blues Singers, 47King Porter Stomp, 48King Tim III (Personality Jock), 
335
Knock Three Times, 178
Ko Ko Mo, 128Kookie, Kookie (Lend Me Your 
Comb), 137
La Bamba, 12, 95, 111, 113, 169
Ladies First, 342, 343, 344Ladies Night, 273Ladies of the Canyon, 219Lady, 227La Grange, 233La Kalle, 389La La La La, 175La La Means I Love You, 213Landlord Blues, 100Land of 1000 Dances, 173, 175Land Speed Record, 270Last Dance, 277, 278–279The Last Temptation, 399The Last Time, 167Late Registration, 405Latin Strut, 276La Tortura, 388La Trayectoria, 389Laughin’ and Cryin’ Blues, 43
The Laughing Song, 22Laundry Service, 386Lawdy Lawdy Blues, 46Lawdy Miss Clawdy, 79, 88, 89Layla, 328Layla and Other Assorted Love 
Songs, 232
Lay Lady Lay, 228Leader of the Pack, 151, 153Lean Back, 401Leave Home, 257Led Zeppelin II, 235, 236Led Zeppelin III, 236Led Zeppelin IV, 236Le Freak, 282Legend, 229Legs, 294Lemon Tree, 162Less Than Zero, 268Lethal, 340Lethal Injection, 344Let It Bleed, 195Let It Snow, Let It Snow, Let It 
Snow, 64
Let Me In, 151
Let’s Dance, 175, 289Let’s Get It On, 216Let’s Go, 411Let’s Go Crazy, 296, 297Let’s Have a Party, 123Let’s Impeach the President, 440Let’s Roll, 434Let’s Stay Together, 215Let’s Talk About Love, 409Let the Good Times Roll, 89Let There Be Drums, 144 M USIC  I NDE x  533Leven Zonder Honger, 310
Licensed to ill, 340Life After Death, 357Life Is but a Dream, 105Life Stinks, 258
Light My Fire, 178, 190Like a Rolling Stone, 162Like a Virgin, 294, 301, 302, 
348, 353
Like a Virgin, 302, 303Limbo Rock, 134Ling Ting Tong, 105Lipstick on Your Collar, 134
Lita, 322, 324
Little Annie Rooney, 22Little Bitty Pretty One, 94Little Children, 165Little Darlin’, 112, 128Little Girl, 113Little Honda, 144Little Johnny Jewel, 254The Little Old Lady (From 
 
Pasadena), 147
Little Old Log Cabin in the 
Lane, 50
Little Red Corvette, 291, 296
Little Red Rooster, 71Little Star, 105, 112Little Things Mean a Lot, 84Little Willy, 243Live and More, 279Live Dead, 184Live! One Night Only, 410Live to Tell, 304Livery Stable Blues, 48Lives in the Balance, 313Lives in the Balance, 314Living for the City, 212Living in America, 217Living in the USA, 222Living Large, 340Living with War, 440Livin’ La Vida Loca, 12, 383, 
384, 385
The Loco-Motion, 134, 135London Calling, 262Lonely, Lonely Nights, 95Lonely Blue Boy, 122Lonely Boy, 134The Lonely Surfer, 143Lonely Teardrops, 102, 112
Lonely Weekends, 120Lonesome Day, 438The Lonesome Death of Hattie 
Carroll, 159
Long Ago and Far Away, 64The Long Run, 231Long Tall Sally, 83, 86, 90, 128Look What the Cat Dragged In, 
330
Loose Change, 400Lotta Lovin’, 121Louie Louie, 12, 112Lovable, 103
Love?, 386Love, Love, Love, 106Love and Kisses, 279Love Buzz, 376
Love Devotion Surrender, 211Love for Sale, 350Love Goes to Building on Fire, 
258
The Love I Lost, 213Love in C Minor, 279Love Is a Battlefield, 294Love Is Like Oxygen, 243
Love Is Strange, 335
Love Letters in the Sand, 130Love Me Do, 166Love Me Tender, 118, 130Love Potion No. 9, 106Lover, 5Love Rollercoaster, 273Lovers Never Say Goodbye, 106A Lover’s Question, 83, 101Love’s in Need of Love Today, 
431
Love Story, 412Love Takes Time, 362
Love to Love You Baby, 275, 277Love Train, 213Love Will Keep Us Together, 
247
The Love You Save, 216Lucille, 90, 101Lucky Lips, 72, 84Lucky Star, 302Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds, 
185
Luka, 313
MacArthur Park, 279
Machine Head, 237Macho Man, 277Mack the Knife, 133Magnificent Seven, 183Main Course, 279, 280Make It Big, 303Make It Funky, 217Makeshift Patriot, 438Malaguena, 113(Mama) He Treats Your Daugh-
ter Mean, 72–74
Mama Said, 152
Mambo Baby, 112Mambo Italiano, 111Mambo Rock, 112Mambo Shevitz, 112Mamma’s Pearl, 216Mannish Boy, 72Man of Words, Man of Music, 243(The Man Who Shot) Liberty 
Valance, 134
The Man Who Sold the World, 243Maple Leaf Rag, 25March of Death, 437Marianne, 132
Marquee Moon, 254Marrakesh Express, 195The Marshall Mathers LP, 404Mary, 181
Mas Flow, 389Mas Flow, Vol. 2, 389Mashed Potato Time, 134Master Race Rock, 263Master of Puppets, 330Master of Reality, 236Matchbox, 120Material Girl, 294, 302
Maybellene, 7, 96
Me Against the World, 357Me and Bobby McGee, 183Mellow Yellow, 181Memphis Blues, 27Menudo, 384Merry Christmas, Baby, 94Mesmerize/Hypnotize, 440The Message, 336Message in a Bottle, 268Metal for Muthas, 319Metal Health, 321, 324, 325Metallica, 330
Midnight at the Oasis, 222Midnight Train to Georgia,  
215
Millennium, 365A Million Ways, 455Mi Reflejo, 367The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill, 
402
Miss E .
 
.
 
. So Addictive, 403
Mississippi Goddam, 172Miss You, 281Mobilize, 438Mockingbird, 219Moment 4 Life, 407A Moment Like This, 453Monday, Monday, 171Money, 148, 155Money Honey, 101The Monkees, 287The Mooche, 350Moody River, 130Moonglow and Theme from 
Picnic, 86
More Songs About Buildings and 
Food, 258
More Than a Woman, 280
Mosh, 439Mother and Child Reunion, 266Mother’s Little Helper, 181Motörhead, 319Motownphilly, 391Mountain Moving Day, 225Move Something, 354MP Da Last Don, 394MRD Song Pack, 440Mr. Kite, 185Mr. Lonely, 135Mrs. Brown, You’ve Got a 
Lovely Daughter, 166
Mrs. Robinson, 170
Mr. Tambourine Man, 170M!ssundaztood, 411
Mule Train, 64, 66Murmur, 372Music from Big Pink, 229Music of My Heart, 383Music of My Mind, 216My Aim Is True, 267, 268My Babe, 71My Beautiful, Dark, Twisted Fan-
tasy, 406
My Best Friend, 393My Boo, 392, 401My Boyfriend’s Back, 151My Boy Lollipop, 266My Country ‘Tis of Thy People 
You’re Dying, 162
My Daddy Rocks Me (With One 
Steady Roll), 82
My Dad’s Gone Crazy, 439My Ding-a-Ling, 99My Generation, 188, 189, 253My Girl, 156
My Happiness, 64, 118, 134My Heart Belongs to Only You, 
135
My Heart Will Go On, 409My Hometown, 300My Kind of Christmas, 367My Old Kentucky Home, 20My Prayer, 104, 109My Reverie, 105My Vietnam, 411My War, 269My Way, 137My Way, 392My World, 455My World 2.0, 455–456
Nackt im Wind, 310
Nashville Skyline, 228Nas Is Like, 398Nasty as They Wanna Be, 344, 354Natural Woman, 138, 173Nazi Punks Fuck Off, 271Nearly Lost You, 379Nebraska, 297, 300Needles and Pins, 165
Negro Blues. see Nigger Blues
The Negro Hour, 62Nellyville, 404Neutron Dance, 304Never Can Say Goodbye, 216Never Can Say Good-Bye, 275Nevermind, 370, 372, 374, 376, 
377
Never Mind the Bollocks, 251New Jole Blon, 100New Orleans, 148New Rose, 261534  ROCKIN ’ OUTNew San Antonio Rose, 54
New York Cops, 437New York State of Mind, 431Nigger Blues, 27Night, 102
Night and Day, 37Night & Day, 267Night Fever, 280The Night Has a Thousand 
Eyes, 135
Night Ripper, 445–446Nights in White Satin, 211Nights on Broadway, 279
The Night They Drove Old 
Dixie Down, 229
Nikki Darling, 348
9mm, 340911 for Peace, 4381984, 320, 3251999, 29696 Tears, 175Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrica, 310Nobody Knows You When 
You’re Down and Out, 46
Nobody Loves Me Like You, 109No Fences, 381
No Jacket Required, 303No Money Down, 96No More Drama, 392No More Tears (Enough Is 
Enough), 277
No Other Love, 125Norman, 135Norwegian Wood, 185No Strings Attached, 365Not Fade Away, 121Nothing but the Beat, 447. . . Nothing Like the Sun, 311Not Ready to Make Nice, 437No Way Out, 357, 393Nowhere Man, 185No Woman, No Cry, 224Now That the Buffalo’s Gone, 
162
Now That We Found Love, 271‘N Sync, 364, 365, 366‘N Sync, 365Nuggets, 253The Number of the Beast, 319Nut Rocker, 144
Occupy This Album, 441
O Dio Mio, 134Off the Wall, 291OG, 340
Oh, Lonesome Me, 122Oh, Pretty Woman, 122Oh, That Beautiful Rag, 27Oh Bondage! Up Yours!, 267Oh Boy!, 121Oh! Carol, 134Oh Girl, 215Oh! Susanna, 19
Oh! You Pretty Things, 243OK Computer, 458Okie from Muskogee, 181Old Black Joe, 20
Old Folks at Home, 19–20The Old Hen Cackled and 
the Rooster’s Going to Crow, 50
Old Man River, 104Old Shep, 116Old Uncle Ned, 19Ol’ Man River, 64
On Bended Knee, 391
On Broadway, 106One, 3311, 2 Step, 401One Fine Day, 151One in a Million (Aaliyah), 403One in a Million (Guns ‘n’ 
Roses), 331, 332
One Love, 429One Mint Julep, 106One Minute Man, 403One Nation under a Groove,  
275
One Night, 118
One O’Clock Jump, 50One of the Boys, 245One Summer Night, 128Only Anarchists Are Pretty,  
264
Only a Pawn in Their Game,  
159
Only God Can Judge Me, 394Only in America, 135, 429Only Love Can Break a Heart,  
134
Only the Lonely, 122Only the Strong Survive, 213Only You, 109On the 6, 384On the Road Again, 182On Through the Night, 319Oops!...I Did It Again, 365, 366Open Sesame, 273Open Sesame, 340Open the Door, Richard, 65Oral Fixation, Vol. 2, 386Osama-Yo’ Mama, 434O Sole Mio, 118
Our Day Will Come, 151Out for Blood, 332Out of Sight, Out of Mind, 105Out of the Cellar, 321Out of Time, 372Overkill, 319Overkill, 319Over There, 24Oxford Town, 159Oye Como Va, 12, 179, 181Oye Mi Canto, 388, 389Paid in Full, 340
Pain Is Love, 399Palisades Park, 134Papa Loves Mambo, 111Papa’s Got a Brand New Bag, 
174
Paper Thin, 342
Paradise City, 331Parallel Lines, 257Paranoid, 235The Partridge Family, 287Part-Time Lover, 305Party Doll, 122
Party Music, 417, 438
Peace Train, 437Peanuts, 105The Peanut Vendor, 37Pearl, 183Peggy Sue, 121Penetration, 143Penny Lane, 185, 287People Get Ready, 162People Got to Be Free, 191The People’s Album, 200Perfidia, 38Personality, 89
Pet Sounds, 145, 146, 147, 185Phases and Stages, 231Physical, 294Pick Up the Pieces, 272Pictures at an Exhibition, 207Piece of My Heart, 183Pieces of You, 408Pink Friday, 407Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded, 
407
Pipeline, 143Piss Factory, 254Planet Rock, 336Planet Waves, 229Plastic Letters, 257Play, 443–444Playboy, 151Please, Please, Please, 103Please Hammer Don’t Hurt ‘Em, 
345
Please Mr. Postman, 148, 151, 
156
Pledging My Love, 94Poetry in Motion, 135Poison Ivy, 106
Poker Face, 412Police and Thieves, 261Pony Time, 134Poor Little Fool, 137Power,  340
The Power of Love, 12, 304Power to the People, 191, 192Precious, 268Predator, 344President Bystander, 441The Pretender, 224A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody, 
25
Pretty Hate Machine, 378
Pretty Vacant, 259Pretzel Logic, 248
The Price of Oil, 437Pride and Joy, 156, 157The Prisoner’s Song, 51Private Dancer, 303Private Life, 268Problems, 259Promise, 390The Promised Land, 224
The Proud, 439
Proud to Be Black, 345PSK, 340Psycho Killer, 258Punky Reggae Party, 266Puppy Love, 134Purple Haze, 181Puttin’ on the Ritz, 25Put Your Head on My Shoulder,  
134
Pyromania, 320, 325
Quadrophenia, 210
Quarter to Three, 148Queen of the Hop, 133Quicksand, 151Quit Playing Games (with My 
Heart), 365
Radio Gaga, 412Ragged Old Flag, 429Rags to Riches, 64Ragtime Violin, 27Rainbow, 362Rainbow Warriors, 313Raindrops, 99Rain on the Scarecrow, 313Raising Hell, 337, 340Rakata, 389Ramblin’ Man, 232Rapper’s Delight, 335, 337Rappin’ Black in a White World, 
335
Rapture, 336Rapture, 303Rastaman Vibration, 224Raunchy, 143Raw Power, 245Ray of Light, 410
Ready for Love, 240Ready to Die, 357Reasonable Doubt, 398Rebel Rouser, 136Rebirth, 386Recovery, 404Red, White, and Blue, 434Red Headed Stranger, 231Rednecks, 223Red River Rock, 144 M USIC  I NDE x  535Red River Valley, 144
Reet Petite, 102, 112Reggatta de Blanc, 268Reign in Blood, 327, 330Rei Momo, 314
Remain in Light, 271Renegade, 399Respect, 173Restless Heart, 89Reveille Rock, 144Revolution, 192, 306Revolver, 185Rhyme Pays, 340
Ricky Martin, 384
Riders on the Storm, 190, 306Ride the Lightning, 330Rio, 290Riot in Cell Block No. 9, 106Rip It Up, 83The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Star -
dust and the Spiders from Mars, 245
The Rising, 438Rising Force, 321Ritual de lo Habitual, 377R. Kelly, 392
Rock-A-Billy, 122Rocka Rolla, 237Rock Around the Clock, 81, 
114, 115
Rock Box, 328, 337, 338–339Rocket 88, 79, 83, 95, 115Rocket Man, 248Rocket to Russia, 257Rockin’ and Rollin’, 81Rockin’ Robin, 94Rock Island Line, 166Rockit, 336Rock Me, 82Rock Me All Night Long, 104Rock ‘n’ Roll, 81Rock & Roll Music, 83, 96, 
97–98
Rock the Boat, 275Rock the Casbah, 262Rock This Town, 295Rocky Mountain High, 231, 349Rock Your Baby, 275, 276Rolling in the Deep, 415Rolling Stone, 72, 83Roll Over Beethoven, 96
Roll with Me Henry, 103, 128Rompe, 389Ropin’ the Wind, 370, 381Rosalita, 223Roses Are Red, 135Roundabout, 208, 210Roxanne, 268Roxanne Roxanne, 342Roxanne’s Revenge, 342Rubber Ball, 135Rubber Soul, 185Rudolph the Red-Nosed Rein-
deer, 66
Rules, 439
Rum and Coca Cola, 64Rumours, 248
Runaround Sue, 109Runaway, 134Runaway Train, 379Run-D.M.C., 336, 337, 338Run for the Hills, 319Running Bear, 162Running on Empty, 224Running Scared, 122
Run the World (Girls), 410
Run to Him, 135
Sabbath Bloody Sabbath, 241
Saddam Stomp, 434Sad Wings of Destiny, 237, 319The Saga Continues, 393Sail Away, 223Sailing, 393Sally Can’t Dance, 246Salsation, 281The SalSoul Hustle, 276Salty Dog Blues, 43
Samen, 310San Antonio Rose, 36Sandinista!, 262Satin Doll, 49Saturday Night Fishfry, 68A Saucerful of Secrets, 210Save the Last Dance for Me, 106, 
112, 151
Saving All My Love for You, 300Say, Say, Say, 305Say It Loud-I’m Black and I’m 
Proud, 175
Say Man, 83, 95Say My Name, 391Say You, Say Me, 304Scarlet Ribbons, 131Scary Monsters and Nice Sprites, 
450
School Day, 83, 96, 150–151School Is Out, 148School’s Out, 242The Score, 402, 408Screaming Life, 373Sea Cruise, 89Sealed with a Kiss, 135Sea of Madness, 320
Searchin’, 106Secret Love, 84Secrets, 390Seek and Destroy, 432See Saw, 109See You Later, Alligator, 115Self-Destruction, 314, 344Sentimiento, 390Seventeen, 259Sex Machine, 217Sex Me (Parts I and II), 392
Sexy Ways, 103Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club 
Band, 4, 5–6, 145, 146–147, 184–185, 201, 203, 
206, 207, 280
Shake, 103Shake, Rattle, and Roll, 72, 115, 
127, 128
Shake a Hand, 101Shake Your Bon Bon, 383Shake Your Booty, 276Shake Your Groove Thing, 279
Sh’Boom, 72, 84, 105, 107–108
She Cried, 135She Loves You, 166Shenandoah, 131Sherry, 110She’s a Bitch, 403She’s About a Mover, 178She’s a Fool, 135She’s All I Ever Had, 383She’s Not There, 165She’s So Unusual, 294She Works Hard for the Money, 
290, 294
Shining Star, 273
Ship A’Hoy, 213Shock’n Y’All, 436The Shoop Shoop Song [It’s in 
His Kiss], 99
Shoot the Moon, 100Shop Around, 156Short People, 223Shot Down in Flames, 432Shotgun Willie, 231Shout, 135Shout at the Devil, 321Show Me the Way, 247Shut Down, 101Siboney, 38Sieg Heil, 265Silk Degrees, 248Silly Little Love Songs, 247Simple Dreams, 222Sin After Sin, 241, 319Since I Met You Baby, 84, 100Sincerely, 109, 128Since U Been Gone, 401Since You’ve Been Gone, 138Singing the Blues, 122
Singles, 379Sister, 296Sister Morphine, 182Sister Ray, 253Sisters Are Doin’ It for Them-
selves, 305
(Sittin’ On) The Dock of the 
Bay, 188
Six in the Morning, 340Sixteen Candles, 110Sixteen Reasons, 132Sixty Minute Man, 81, 84,  
101, 139
Skin Tight, 273
Slave Driver, 224Sleep Walk, 144
The Slim Shady LP, 404Slippery When Wet, 326–327, 330Slippin’ and Slidin’, 90Slippin’ into Darkness, 217Slow Jamz, 401Slow Motion, 401Smash, 380Smells Like Teen Spirit, 374, 
376
Smile, 147Smiley Smile, 147Smoke on the Water, 237, 238Smoke That Cigarette, 66Smokey Joe’s Cafe, 106Smooth, 383, 384So, 311Society’s Child, 191Sock It to Me, Baby, 153Soldier Boy, 152A Soldier’s Heart, 434So Long, 72
So Long, It’s Been Good to 
Know You, 157
Somebody to Love, 183, 196Someday We’ll All Be  
Free, 410
Some Gave All, 433Some Hearts, 453Someone Like You, 415Song from Moulin Rouge, 125Songs in A Minor, 410Songs in the Key of Life, 216, 248Sonic Jihad, 439Sonic Reducer, 258Son of a Bush, 438Sorry [I Ran All the Way 
Home], 130
Soul Makossa, 275Soul Man, 172Soul Sacrifice, 194Sounds of Silence, 170South American Way, 37South Bronx, 334, 340South Carolina (Barnwell), 224Southern Man, 233The South’s Gonna Do It Again, 
233
Space Oddity, 243
Spanish Fever, 272Spanish Harlem, 112, 152Speakerboxxx/ The Love Below, 
405
Speedo, 105Spice, 408Spiral Scratch, 262Spirits in the Material World, 
268536  ROCKIN ’ OUTSplish Splash, 133
Sports, 303Stagger Lee, 89Stained Class, 319, 352Stairway to Heaven (Neil 
 
Sedaka), 134
Stairway to Heaven (Led 
 
Zeppelin), 236, 238, 240, 
309
Stand!, 195Stand by Me, 306Stankonia, 405Star Spangled Banner, 194, 
298, 429
State of Shock, 308Stayin’ Alive, 280, 303Still a G Thang, 394Stillmatic, 439Still Not a Player, 384Still of the Night, 105Still the One, 224Stir It Up, 266St. Louis Blues, 28, 29Stop! In the Name of Love, 157, 
158
Stop That Rag, 27
Stop the War, 196Stop Your Sobbing, 268Straight Outta Compton, 344The Stranger, 248Stranger in a Strange Land, 320Stranger in Paradise, 64Strawberry Fields Forever, 
185, 287
Stray Cat Strut, 295Street Fighting Man, 192Street Songs, 291Strictly 4 My N.I.G.G.A.Z., 357Stripped, 367Stronger (What Doesn’t Kill 
You), 453
Stupid Cupid, 138Submission, 259Sub Pop 200, 373Subterranean Homesick Blues, 
160
Such a Night, 101, 127Suddenly, 303Sugar Pie Honey Bunch, 301Suicide Solution, 351, 352Suite: Judy Blue Eyes, 195
Sukiyaki, 12Summer Breeze, 223Summer in the City, 171Summertime, 29Summertime Blues, 121, 235Sunday Bloody Sunday, 311, 431Sunday Kind of Love, 105Sundown, 223Sunshine of Your Love, 182, 235Sunshine on My Shoulder, 231Sunshine Superman, 170Supa Dupa’ Fly, 403Super Bass, 407
Superfreak, 291Superman, 281Supernatural, 383, 384Super Ugly, 398
Superunknown, 377Surfacing, 409Surf City, 147Surfer Girl/Little Deuce Coupe, 
146
Surfer’s Stomp, 143Surfin’, 146Surfin’ Bird, 143
Surfin’ Safari, 146
Surfin’ U.S.A., 144–145, 146Surfin’ U.S.A., 146Surrender, 118Survivor, 391Swanee, 31Sweet Baby James, 219Sweet Dreams, 289Sweethearts of the Rodeo, 229Sweet Home Alabama, 233Sweet Jane, 245Sweet Leilani, 36Sweet Little Sixteen, 83, 96, 
144, 145
Sweet Neo-Con, 440
Sweet Nothin’s, 123Sweet Oblivion, 379Sweet Sixteen, 72, 79Sweet Soul Music, 172Sweet Talkin’ Guy, 155Swinging School, 134Swingin’ on a Star, 64Symphonie Fantastique, 350Synchronicity, 268
Tainted Love, 289
Take Good Care of My Baby, 
135
Take It Easy, 230Take Me Home, 281Take Me Home, Country Roads, 
231
Take Me to the River, 258Take My Breath Away, 304Takeover, 398Take the ‘A’ Train, 49Takin’ Care of Business, 234Taking the Long Way, 437
Talk Back Trembling Lips, 135Talkin’ ‘Bout Jesus, 102Talkin’ ‘Bout You, 102Talking Book, 216Talking Heads ‘77, 258Tallahassee Lassie, 134Tall Paul, 132, 134Tammy, 84Tam Tam pour L’Ethiopie, 310Tangerine, 276Tango Rag, 29Tapestry, 220–221Tarkus, 207
Tattooed Love Boys, 268Tea for the Tillerman, 223Tea for Two, 111Tea for Two Cha Cha, 111
Teardrops from My Eyes, 72Tearin’ Up My Heart, 365Tears Are Not Enough, 310Tears on My Pillow, 106Techno: The New Dance Sound of 
Detroit, 443
Teddy’s Jam, 390Teen-Age Crush, 122, 132, 137
A Teenager in Love, 109
A Teenager’s Romance, 137Teen Beat, 144Tejas, 233Tell Us the Truth, 440Telstar, 143Ten, 376, 379Ten Commandments of Love, 
109
Tequila, 95, 112, 143The Terror State, 438Tha Block Is Hot, 406Tha Carter, 406
Tha Carter III, 406Tha Carter IV, 406Thankful, 453Thank God I’m a Country Boy, 
231
Thank Me Later, 406Thank You, 393Thank You (Falletinme Be Mice 
Elf Agin), 195
That Lady, 215That’ll Be the Day, 121That’s All Right, 116That’s Amore, 64That’s My Desire, 64That’s My Little Susie, 113That’s the Way (I Like It), 276That’s the Way I’ve Always 
Heard It Should Be, 220
That’s the Way of the World, 273That’s What Friends Are For, 
306
That’s When Your Heartaches 
Begin, 118
That’s Why (I Love You So), 
102
Their Greatest Hits (Eagles), 231
Then He Kissed Me, 151There Goes My Baby, 106There I’ve Said It Again, 135There’ll Be No Teardrops To-
night, 68
There’s a Riot Goin’ On, 195These Boots Are Made for 
Walkin’, 192
They Dance Alone, 313(They Long to Be) Close to 
You, 247They Met in Rio, 37
The Things I Used to Do, 90Think, 103, 173Thirty Days, 96Thirty Seconds over Tokyo, 258
This Is Me . . . Then, 386This Is My Country, 191This Is Not a Test, 403This Land Is Your Land, 150, 
157
This Little Light of Mine, 102, 
150
This Magic Moment, 106, 112, 
151
This Train Is Bound for Glory, 
157
Those Lonely, Lonely Nights, 89Those Oldies but Goodies, 111Thou Shalt Not Kill, 440Three O’Clock Blues, 83Three Times a Lady, 300Thriller, 291–293, 296, 300,303, 
316, 325, 362, 372
The Thrill Is Gone, 83Thunder Road, 223The Thunder Rolls, 381
The Tide Is High, 266Tiger, 134Till I Waltz Again with You, 
125
The Times They Are A-Chan-
gin’, 161, 306
Ting-a-Ling, 106Tired of Waiting for You, 167To All the Girls I’ve Loved Be-
fore, 12, 305
To Cut a Long Story Short, 289(Today I Met) The Boy I’m 
Gonna Marry, 153
Today Your Love, Tomorrow 
the World, 263
To Know Him Is to Love Him, 
110
To Washington, 437Tom Dooley, 132Tommy, 193, 206, 280Tomorrow Never Knows, 185Tonight We Love, 3Tonight We’re Settin’ the 
Woods on Fire, 68
Too Fast for Love, 321
Too Hot, 273Too Much Monkey Business, 96Tooth and Nail, 324Topsy Part I, 144Topsy Part II, 143To the Extreme, 345Touch, 409Toys in the Attic, 240Tragic Kingdom, 408Tra La La, 72Trans Europe Express, 336Transformer, 245 M USIC  I NDE x  537Travelin’ Man, 137
Treasure of Love, 83, 101Tres Hombres, 233, 234Tribute, 330A Tribute to Heroes, 430
True Blue, 302, 303Truth #2, 436TSOP (The Sound of Philadel-
phia), 213
Tu Pum Pum, 387Turkey in the Straw, 18Turn Me Loose, 134Turn Me On, 447, 448–449
Turn! Turn! Turn!, 159
Turvy Part II, 144Tush, 234Tusk, 248Tutti Frutti, 83, 90, 91–92, 
128, 129
Tweedlee Dee, 84The Twelfth of Never, 12712 Play, 392Twenty-first Century Schizoid  
Man, 406
2112, 237Twilight Time, 109
The Twist, 134Twist, Twist Senora, 135Twist and Shout, 135A Twisted Sense of God, 437Twistin’ the Night Away, 103, 
134
2pacalypse Now, 357
Ubangi Stomp, 120
Ultramega OK, 376Un-break My Heart, 390Uncle Sam-ba, 37Under Construction, 403Under My Thumb, 192, 196Under the Boardwalk, 106The Unforgettable Fire, 311Uninvited, 410Unison, 12, 409Unleashed, 433, 434Unplugged (Alicia Keys), 411
Until You Come Back to Me 
(That’s What I’m Gonna Do), 217
Up on Cripple Creek, 229Up on the Roof, 106, 112, 138
Uptown, 170Up Your Alley, 332Use Your Illusion I, 331Use Your Illusion II, 331
V an Halen, 240
Vaya con Dios, 84, 125The Velvet Underground, 253The Velvet Underground and Nico, 
252
Venni Vetti Vecci, 399Venus, 134Venus in Blue Jeans, 89
Video Killed the Radio Star, 289Virginia Plain, 245Vision of Love, 362Viva Tirado, 178
Vivid, 331Vogue, 302Vol. 2.Hard Knock Life, 399Vol. 3.Life and Times of S. Carter, 
399
Volare, 12, 133Vs., 376
The W, 397
Wabash Cannonball, 55The Wah Watusi, 134Waiting for the Robert E. Lee, 
29
Waiting for Tonight, 383Wait Til’ My Bobby Gets Home, 
153
Wake Up Everybody, 213Wake Up Little Susie, 122, 139Walk-Don’t Run, 144Walking after Midnight, 122Walking on the Moon, 268Walking the Floor Over You, 65
Walking to New Orleans, 88Walk Like an Egyptian, 432Walk on By, 154Walk on the Wild Side, 245Walk Right In, 159Walk this Way, 337, 338The Wall, 210Wallflower, 103, 128Wang Dang Doodle, 71Wanted Dead or Alive, 431Wanted: The Outlaws, 231War, 196War, 311
War/We Don’t Need No Trou-
ble, 224
Watching the Detectives, 
267–268
Waterfalls, 391Watermelon Man, 178Way Down Yonder in New Or-
leans, 134
Waylon and Willie, 231The Way We Were, 247The Way You Move, 401, 405
We Almost Lost Detroit, 224We Are the World, 306, 307–
308, 310, 315
We Can Be Together, 192We Don’t Need Another Hero 
(Thunderdome), 304
Wee Wee Hours, 96We Got Love, 134We Gotta Get Out of This 
Place, 189
The Weight, 229We Know War, 437Welcome to the Jungle, 331
Well-O, Well-O, Well-O, Baby, 
89
A Well Respected Man, 167We’re All in the Same Gang, 344
We’re an American Band, 237We’re a Winner, 191We’re Only in It for the Money, 206We Shall Be Free, 381We Shall Overcome, 150, 159, 
162, 308
We Shall Overcome: The Seeger 
Sessions, 440
We Vibrate, 261We Want Peace, 437What About Love, 332What About Your Friends, 
390–391
What a Girl Wants, 383What a Wonderful World, 219What’d I Say, 102, 112What Is Hip, 272What Made You Say That, 382What More Can I Give, 429What’s Goin’ On, 191, 429What’s Goin’ On, 216, 402
What’s Luv, 399What’s My Name, 261What’s the 411?, 390What’s the Use of Breaking 
Up, 213
What Will I Tell My Heart?, 
105
What Would You Do?, 439Wheels of Fire, 182When a Man Loves a Woman, 
172
When Doves Cry, 296, 297, 429When the Going Gets Tough, 
the Tough Get Going, 304
When I Grow Up [To Be a 
Man], 146
When Love Takes Over, 447When the Swallows Come Back 
to Capistrano, 94
When the World Ends, 437When Will I See You Again, 213When You Dance, 112When You Were Mine, 296Where Did Our Love Go, 157
Where Do Broken Hearts Go, 
300
Where Have All the Flowers 
Gone, 159
Where Is the Love?, 439Where or When, 109Where the Stars and Stripes and 
the Eagle Fly, 433
Where Were You (When the 
World Stopped Turn-ing), 433
Which Side Are You On, 150Whip It, 271
Whispering, 31Whispering Bells, 130The Whistling Coon, 22White Album, 192, 328, 445
White Christmas, 36White Light/White Heat, 253White Lines (Don’t Do It), 336White Rabbit, 181, 183White Riot, 261A Whiter Shade of Pale, 210Whitesnake, 330A White Sport Coat (and a Pink 
Carnation), 122
Whitney, 300Whitney Houston, 303Whittier Boulevard, 175Who Are You?, 431Who Dunit, 279Whole Lotta Love, 236, 326Whole Lotta Shakin’ Goin’ 
On, 120
The Whole World, 438Who Says a Funk Band Can’t 
Play Rock?, 8
The Who Sell Out, 206
Who’s Next?, 322Who’s Sorry Now, 84, 132, 134Why?, 439Why Do Fools Fall in Love,  
106, 128
Why Do Lovers Break Each 
Other’s Hearts, 153
Why Do Men Fight, 437Why Don’t You Haul Off and 
Love Me, 71
Wichita Lineman, 231The Wild, the Innocent, and the E 
Street Shuffle, 223
Wild Boys, 290Wild One, 134Wild Thing, 189Wildwood Flower, 51Wild World, 223Willie and the Hand Jive, 94Will the Circle Be 
 
Unbroken, 51
Will the Circle Be 
 
Unbroken, 228
Will You Love Me Tomorrow, 
148, 152, 220, 221
Wipe Out, 143, 144Wisin vs. Yandel: Los Extrater -
restres, 390
With a Little Help from My 
Friends, 193–194
Without You, 135
The Woman in Me, 382, 408Woman of the Year, 412Won’t Get Fooled Again, 431Wooden Ships, 195Woodstock, 195, 219Wooly Bully, 175Word of Mouf, 404Words of Love, 171538  ROCKIN ’ OUTWordy Rappinghood, 336
Working My Way Back to You, 
213
Work It, 403, 405Work with Me Annie, 103, 139
The World Is a Ghetto, 212World Wide Suicide, 440A World without Love, 165The Worst Thing That Could 
 
Happen, 110
Wreck of the Old 97, 51The Writing’s on the Wall, 391Wu-Tang Clan Forever, 397
Yakety Yak, 106
Yeah!, 392, 401Yellow Submarine, 181The Yes Album, 210Y .M.C.A., 277Yo! Bum Rush the Show, 341Yo’ Ol’ Swingmaster, 78
You, You, You, 125You Ain’t Seen Nothin’ Yet, 235You Always Hurt the One You 
Love, 89
You Are My Destiny, 134
You Can’t Hurry Love, 291You Didn’t Have to Be So Nice, 
171
You Don’t Have to Say You Love 
Me, 166
You Don’t Know My Name, 411You Don’t Own Me, 134
You Keep Me Hanging On, 236
You Make Me Feel Brand New, 
213, 214
You Make Me Feel Like a 
 
Natural Woman, 221
You Need Love, 236Young Americans, 245–246Young, Gifted, and Black, 191
Young Blood, 106Young Love, 122, 132You Owe Me, 398Your Body’s Callin’, 392
Your Cheatin’ Heart, 67, 68You Really Got Me, 167You’re Breaking My Heart, 64You’re Makin’ Me High, 390You’re Missing, 438You’re My World, 165You’re No Good, 222You’re So Vain, 220
You’re Still the One, 410
You’re the First, the Last, My 
 
Everything, 217
(Your Love Keeps Lifting) Me 
Higher and Higher, 102
Your Mama Don’t Dance, 230You Send Me, 83, 103You Should Be Dancing, 279
You Stepped into My Life,  
282
You Turn Me On, I’m a Radio, 
219
You’ve Got a Friend, 219,  
221, 222
You’ve Got to Fight for Your 
Right to Party, 340
You’ve Got to Stand for 
 
Something, 433
You’ve Lost That Lovin’ Feelin’, 
138, 153
Zen Arcade, 270
Zip-A-Dee Doo-Dah, 153Zip Coon, 18
